Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.	No, who are you? Stop and identify yourself.
Long live the king!	Long live the king!
Barnardo?	Is that Barnardo?
He.	Yes, it’s me.
You come most carefully upon your hour.	You’ve come right on time.
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	Thanks for letting me go. It’s bitterly cold out, and I’m depressed.
Have you had quiet
                                guard?	Has it been a quiet night?
Not a mouse stirring.	I haven’t even heard a mouse squeak.
Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.	Well, good night. If you happen to see Horatio and Marcellus, who are supposed to stand guard with me tonight, tell them to hurry.
I think I hear them.—Stand, ho! Who’s
                            there?	I think I hear them. —Stop! Who’s there?
RATIO and
                        MARCELLUS
	MARCELLUS and HORATIO enter.
Friends to this
                                ground.	Friends of this country.
And liegemen to the Dane.	And servants of the Danish king.
Give you good
                                night.	Good night to you both.
O, farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved you?	Good-bye. Who’s taken over the watch for you?
Barnardo has my place. Give you good night.	Barnardo’s taken my place. Good night.
ISCO
	FRANCISCO exits.
Holla, Barnardo.	Hello, Barnardo.
Say what, is Horatio there?	Hello. Is Horatio here too?
A piece of him.	More or less.
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.	Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, Marcellus.
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?	So, tell us, did you see that thing again tonight?
I have seen nothing.	I haven’t seen anything.
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us. Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes and speak to it.	Horatio says we’re imagining it, and won’t let himself believe anything about this horrible thing that we’ve seen twice now. That’s why I’ve begged him to come on our shift tonight, so that if the ghost appears he can see what we see and speak to it.
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.	Oh, nonsense. It’s not going to appear.
Sit down a while And let us once again assail your ears, That are so fortified against our story, What we have two nights seen.	Sit down for a while, and we’ll tell you again the story you don’t want to believe, about what we’ve seen two nights now.
Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.	Well, let’s sit down and listen to Barnardo tell us.
Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from the pole Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—	Last night, when that star to the west of the North Star had traveled across the night sky to that point where it’s shining now, at one o'clock, Marcellus and I—
GHOST
	The GHOST enters.
Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again!	Quiet, shut up! It’s come again.
In the same figure like the king that’s dead.	Looking just like the dead king.

(to
                                HORATIO) Thou art a scholar. Speak to
                                it, Horatio.	(to HORATIO) You’re well-educated, Horatio. Say something to it.
Looks it not like the king? Mark it, Horatio.	Doesn’t he look like the king, Horatio?
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.	Very much so. It’s terrifying.
It would be spoke to.	It wants us to speak to it.
Question it, Horatio.	Ask it something, Horatio.
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee, speak.	What are you, that you walk out so late at night, looking like the dead king of Denmark when he dressed for battle? By God, I order you to speak.
It is offended.	It looks like you’ve offended it.
See, it stalks away.	Look, it’s going away.
Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!	Stay! Speak! Speak! I order you, speak!
HOST
	The GHOST exits.
'Tis gone and will not answer.	It’s gone. It won’t answer now.
How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale. Is not this something more than fantasy? What think you on ’t?	What’s going on, Horatio? You’re pale and trembling. You agree now that we’re not imagining this, don’t you? What do you think about it?
Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.	I swear to God, if I hadn’t seen this with my own eyes I’d never believe it.
Is it not like the king?	Doesn’t it look like the king?
As thou art to thyself. Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated. So frowned he once when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. 'Tis strange.	Yes, as much as you look like yourself. The king was wearing exactly this armor when he fought the king of Norway. And the ghost frowned just like the king did once when he attacked the Poles, traveling on the ice in sleds. It’s weird.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.	It’s happened like this twice before, always at this exact time. He stalks by us at our post like a warrior.
In what particular thought to work I know not, But in the gross and scope of mine opinion This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	I don’t know exactly how to explain this, but I have a general feeling this means bad news for our country.
Good now, sit down and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for implements of war, Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint laborer with the day? Who is ’t that can inform me?	All right, let’s sit down and discuss that question. Somebody tell me why this strict schedule of guards has been imposed, and why so many bronze cannons are being manufactured in Denmark, and so many weapons bought from abroad, and why the shipbuilders are so busy they don’t even rest on Sunday. Is something about to happen that warrants working this night and day? Who can explain this to me?
That can I. At least, the whisper goes so: our last king, Whose image even but now appeared to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet (For so this side of our known world esteemed him) Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of to the conqueror, Against the which a moiety competent Was gagèd by our king, which had returned To the inheritance of Fortinbras Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant And carriage of the article designed, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in ’t, which is no
                                other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand	I can. Or at least I can describe the rumors. As you know, our late king, whom we just now saw as a ghost, was the great rival of Fortinbras, king of Norway. Fortinbras dared him to battle. In that fight, our courageous Hamlet (or at least that’s how we thought of him) killed old King Fortinbras, who—on the basis of a valid legal document—surrendered all his territories, along with his life, to his conqueror. If our king had lost, he would have had to do the same. But now old Fortinbras’s young son, also called Fortinbras—he is bold, but unproven—has gathered a bunch of thugs from the lawless outskirts of the country. For some food, they’re eager to take on the tough enterprise of securing the lands the elder Fortinbras lost.
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.	As far as I understand, that’s why we’re posted here tonight and why there’s such a commotion in Denmark lately.
I think it be no other but e'en so. Well may it sort that this portentous figure Comes armèd through our watch so like the king That was and is the question of these wars.	I think that’s exactly right—that explains why the ghost of the late king would haunt us now, since he caused these wars.
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun, and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And even the like precurse of feared events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.	The ghost is definitely something to worry about. In the high and mighty Roman Empire, just before the emperor Julius Caesar was assassinated, corpses rose out of their graves and ran through the streets of Rome speaking gibberish. There were shooting stars, and blood mixed in with the morning dew, and threatening signs on the face of the sun. The moon, which controls the tides of the sea, was so eclipsed it almost went completely out. And we’ve had similar omens of terrible things to come, as if heaven and earth have joined together to warn us what’s going to happen.
GHOST
	The GHOST enters.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again. I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay,
                                illusion!	Wait, look! It has come again. I’ll meet it if it’s the last thing I do. —Stay here, you hallucination!
 spreads his arms	The GHOST spreads his arms.
If thou hast any sound or use of voice, Speak to me.	If you have a voice or can make sounds, speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which happily foreknowing may avoid, Oh, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay and speak!	If there’s any good deed I can do that will bring you peace and me honor, speak to me. If you have some secret knowledge of your country’s sad fate—which might be avoided if we knew about it—then, please, speak. Or if you’ve got some buried treasure somewhere, which they say often makes ghosts restless, then tell us about it. Stay and speak!
The cock crows	A rooster crows.
—Stop
                                it, Marcellus.	Keep it from leaving, Marcellus.
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?	Should I strike it with my spear?
Do, if it will not stand.	Yes, if it doesn’t stand still.
'Tis here.	It’s over here.
'Tis
                                here.	There it is.
HOST
	The GHOST exits.
'Tis gone. We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence, For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.	It’s gone. We were wrong to threaten it with violence, since it looks so much like a king. Besides, we can’t hurt it anymore than we can hurt the air. Our attack was stupid, futile, and wicked.
It was about to speak when the cock crew.	It was about to say something when the rooster crowed.
And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day, and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine, and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	And then it acted startled, like a guilty person caught by the law. I’ve heard that the rooster awakens the god of day with its trumpetlike crowing, and makes all wandering ghosts, wherever they are, hurry back to their hiding places. We’ve just seen proof of that.
It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long. And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad. The nights are wholesome. Then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallowed and so gracious is that time.	Yes, it faded away when the rooster crowed. Some people say that just before Christmas the rooster crows all night long, so that no ghost dares go wandering, and the night is safe. The planets have no sway over us, fairies' spells don’t work, and witches can’t bewitch us. That’s how holy that night is.
So have I heard and do in part believe it. But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen tonight Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	Yes, I’ve heard the same thing and sort of believe it. But look, morning is breaking beyond that hill in the east, turning the sky red. Let’s interrupt our watch and go tell young Hamlet what we’ve seen tonight. I’m sure this ghost that’s so silent with us will speak to him. Don’t you agree that we owe it to him to tell him about this, out of duty and love?
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently.	Let’s do it. I know where we’ll find him this morning.
Exeunt	They exit.
UDIUS, king of Denmark;
                            GERTRUDE the queen; HAMLET;
                            POLONIUS; his son LAERTES; and his
                        daughter OPHELIA; LORDS attendant	CLAUDIUS, the king of Denmark, enters, along with GERTRUDE the queen, HAMLET, POLONIUS, POLONIUS ’s son LAERTES and daughter OPHELIA, and LORDS who wait on the king.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we—as ’twere with a defeated joy, With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks. Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleaguèd with the dream of his advantage, He hath not failed to pester us with message Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.	Although I still have fresh memories of my brother the elder Hamlet’s death, and though it was proper to mourn him throughout our kingdom, life still goes on—I think it’s wise to mourn him while also thinking about my own well being. Therefore, I’ve married my former sister-in-law, the queen, with mixed feelings of happiness and sadness. I know that in marrying Gertrude I’m only doing what all of you have wisely advised all along—for which I thank you. Now, down to business. You all know what’s happening. Young Fortinbras, underestimating my strength or imagining that the death of the king has thrown my country into turmoil, dreams of getting the better of me, and never stops pestering me with demands that I surrender the territory his father lost to the elder Hamlet, my dead brother-in-law. So much for Fortinbras.
EMAND and
                            CORNELIUS
	VOLTEMAND and CORNELIUS enter.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting	Now, here’s what needs to be done.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein, in that the levies, The lists, and full proportions are all made Out of his subject; and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow.
                                (gives
                                    them a paper) Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	I’ve written to Fortinbras’s uncle, the present head of Norway, an old bedridden man who knows next to nothing about his nephew’s plans. I’ve told the uncle to stop those plans, which he has the power to do, since all the troops assembled by young Fortinbras are Norwegian, and thus under the uncle’s control. I’m giving the job of delivering this letter to you, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand. Your business in Norway will be limited to this task. (he gives them a paper) Now good-bye. Show your loyalty by leaving quickly, rather than with elaborate speeches.
In that and all things will we show our duty.	We’ll do our duty to you in that and everything else.
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.	I have no doubt you will. Good-bye.
TEMAND and
                            CORNELIUS
	CORNELIUS and VOLTEMAND exit.
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldst thou have, Laertes?	And now, Laertes, what do you have to tell me? You have a favor you to ask of me. What is it, Laertes? You’ll never waste your words when talking to the king of Denmark. What could you ever ask for that I wouldn’t give you? Your father and the Danish throne are as close as the mind and the heart, or the hand and the mouth. What would you like, Laertes?
My dread lord, Your leave and favor to return to France, From whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your coronation, Yet now, I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.	My lord, I want your permission to go back to France, which I left to come to Denmark for your coronation. I confess, my thoughts are on France, now that my duty is done. Please, let me go.
Have you your father’s leave? What says
                            Polonius?	Do you have your father’s permission? What does Polonius say?
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laborsome petition, and at last Upon his will I sealed my hard consent. I do beseech you, give him leave to go.	My son has worn me down by asking me so many times. In the end I grudgingly consented. I beg you, let him go.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will.— But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—	In that case, leave when you like, Laertes, and spend your time however you wish. I hereby grant your request, and hope you have a good time. And now, Hamlet, my nephew and my son—

(aside) A little more than kin and
                                less than kind.	(speaking so no one else can hear) Too many family ties there for me.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?	Why are you still so gloomy, with a cloud hanging over you?
Not so, my lord. I am too much i' the sun.	It’s not true, sir. Your son is out in the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not forever with thy vailèd lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust. Thou know’st ’tis common. All that lives
                                must die, Passing through nature to eternity.	My dear Hamlet, stop wearing these black clothes, and be friendly to the king. You can’t spend your whole life with your eyes to the ground remembering your noble father. It happens all the time, what lives must die eventually, passing to eternity.
Ay, madam, it is common.	Yes, mother, it happens all the time.
If
                                it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?	So why does it seem so particular to you?
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not
                                “seems.” 'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed
                                “seem,” For they are actions that a man might play. But I have that within which passeth show, These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	“Seem,” mother? No, it is. I don’t know what you mean by “seem.” Neither my black clothes, my dear mother, nor my heavy sighs, nor my weeping, nor my downcast eyes, nor any other display of grief can show what I really feel. It’s true that all these things “seem” like grief, since a person could use them to fake grief if he wanted to. But I’ve got more real grief inside me that you could ever see on the surface. These clothes are just a hint of it.
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father. But you must know your father lost a father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief. It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschooled. For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! 'Tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died today, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to
                                earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father. For let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne,	Hamlet, you are so sweet and such a good son to mourn your father like this. But you have to remember, that your father lost his father, who lost his father before him, and every time, each son has had to mourn his father for a certain period. But overdoing it is just stubborn. It’s not manly. It’s not what God wants, and it betrays a vulnerable heart and an ignorant and weak mind. Since we know that everyone must die sooner or later, why should we take it to heart? You’re committing a crime against heaven, against the dead, and against nature. And it’s irration-al, since the truth is that all fathers must die. Please give up this useless mourning of yours and start thinking of me as your new father.
And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire. And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.	Because everyone knows that you are the man closest to this throne, and I love you just as much as any father loves his son. And your plans for going back to Wittenberg are not what I want. I’m asking you now to stay here in my company as the number-one member of my court, my nephew and now my son too.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet. I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.	Please answer my prayers, Hamlet, and stay with us. Don’t go back to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.	I’ll obey you as well as I can, ma'am.
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark.—Madam, come. This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof No jocund health that Denmark drinks today But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.	That’s the right answer—it shows your love. Stay in Denmark like us.—My dear wife, come. Hamlet’s agreeing to stay makes me happy, and every merry toast I’ll drink today will be heard as far as the clouds overhead. My drinking will be echoed in the heavens. Let’s go.
h. Exeunt all but HAMLET
	Trumpets play. Everyone except HAMLET exits.
Oh, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew, Or that the Everlasting had not fixed His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God! How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on ’t, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this. But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two. So excellent a king, that was to this Hyperion to a satyr. So loving to my mother	Ah, I wish my dirty flesh could melt away into a vapor, or that God had not made a law against suicide. Oh God, God! How tired, stale, and pointless life is to me. Damn it! It’s like a garden that no one’s taking care of, and that’s growing wild. Only nasty weeds grow in it now. I can’t believe it’s come to this. My father’s only been dead for two months—no, not even two. Such an excellent king, as superior to my uncle as a god is to a beast, and so loving toward my mother that he kept the wind from blowing too hard on her face.
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly.—Heaven and earth, Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on, and yet, within a month— Let me not think on ’t. Frailty, thy name is
                                woman!— A little month, or ere those shoes were old With which she followed my poor father’s body, Like Niobe, all tears. Why she, even she— O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason Would have mourned longer!—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month, Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good, But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.	Oh God, do I have to remember that? She would hang on to him, and the more she was with him the more she wanted to be with him; she couldn’t get enough of him. Yet even so, within a month of my father’s death (I don’t even want to think about it. Oh women! You are so weak!), even before she had broken in the shoes she wore to his funeral, crying like crazy—even an animal would have mourned its mate longer than she did!—there she was marrying my uncle, my father’s brother, who’s about as much like my father as I’m like Hercules. Less than a month after my father’s death, even before the tears on her cheeks had dried, she remarried. Oh, so quick to jump into a bed of incest! That’s not good, and no good can come of it either. But my heart must break in silence, since I can’t mention my feelings aloud.
RATIO,
                        MARCELLUS, and BARNARDO
	HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BARNARDO enter.
Hail to your lordship.	Hello, sir.
I am glad to see
                                you well.— Horatio? Or I do forget myself?	Nice to see you again, Horatio—that is your name, right?
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.	That’s me, sir. Still your respectful servant.
Sir, my good friend, I’ll change that name with you. And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?— Marcellus!	Not my servant, but my friend. I’ll change that name for you. But what are you doing so far from Wittenberg, Horatio? —Oh, Marcellus?
My good lord.	Hello, sir.
(to
                                MARCELLUS) I am very glad to see
                                you.—(to
                                BARNARDO) Good even, sir. (to
                                HORATIO) —But what, in
                                faith, make you from Wittenberg?	(to MARCELLUS) So nice to see you.—(to BARNARDO) Hello, sir.(to HORATIO)—But what are you doing away from Wittenberg, Horatio?
A truant disposition, good my lord.	I felt like skipping school, sir.
I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself. I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.	I wouldn’t allow your enemies to say that, and I won’t believe it from you. I know you’d never skip school. What are you doing here in Elsinore? I’ll teach you to drink hard by the time you leave.
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.	Sir, we came to see your father’s funeral.
I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow student. I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.	Please, don’t make fun of me. I think you came to see my mother’s wedding instead.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.	Well, sir, it’s true it came soon after.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father—methinks I see my father.	It was all about saving a few bucks, Horatio. The leftovers from the funeral dinner made a convenient wedding banquet. Oh, I’d rather have met my fiercest enemy in heaven, Horatio, than have lived through that terrible day! My father—I think I see my father.
Where, my lord?	Where, sir?
In my mind’s eye,
                            Horatio.	In my imagination, Horatio.
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.	I saw him once. He was an admirable king.
He was a man. Take him for all in all. I shall not look upon his like again.	He was a great human being. He was perfect in everything. I’ll never see the likes of him again.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.	Sir, I think I saw him last night.
Saw who?	Saw who?
My lord, the king your father.	Your father, sir. The dead king.
The king my father?!	The king my father?!
Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	Don’t get too excited yet, sir. Just listen carefully while I tell you the amazing thing I saw, with these gentlemen as witnesses.
For God’s love, let me
                            hear.	For God’s sake, let me hear it.
Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch, In the dead waste and middle of the night, Been thus encountered: a figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie, Appears before them and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with them the third night kept the watch, Where—as they had delivered, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good— The apparition comes. I knew your father. These hands are not more like.	After midnight, for two nights running, these two guards, Marcellus and Barnardo, saw a figure that looked very much like your father, in full armor from head to toe. It just appeared before them and marched past them with slow dignity three times, a staff’s distance from their amazed eyes, while they turned, quaking with fear and too shocked to speak. They told me all about this, so on the third night I agreed to come stand guard with them, to see for myself. It happened again, just as they had described. I knew your father. This ghost looked as much like him as my two hands are like each other.
But
                                where was this?	But where did this happen?
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.	On the platform where we stand guard, sir.
Did you not speak to it?	Didn’t you talk to it?
My lord, I did, But answer made it none. Yet once methought It lifted up its head and did address Itself to motion, like as it would speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it shrunk in haste away And vanished from our sight.	I did, sir, but it didn’t answer me. It raised its head once as if it was about to speak, but just then the rooster started crowing, and the ghost vanished from sight.
'Tis
                                very strange.	That’s very strange.
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true. And we did think it writ down in our duty To let you know of it.	I swear to God it’s true, sir. We thought you ought to know about it.
Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch tonight?	Yes, I should know, but it disturbs me. Are you on duty again tonight?
We do, my
                            lord.	Yes, sir.
Armed, say you?	It was armed, you say?
Armed, my lord.	Armed, sir.
From
                                top to toe?	From head to toe?
My lord, from head to foot.	Yes, from top to bottom, sir.
Then saw you not
                                his face?	So you couldn’t see his face, then?
Oh yes, my lord. He wore his beaver up.	Oh, yes, we could, sir. He had his helmet visor up.
What, looked he frowningly?	Was he frowning?
A
                                countenance more In sorrow than in anger.	He looked more sad than angry.
Pale or
                            red?	Was he pale or flushed and red-faced?
Nay, very pale.	Very pale, sir.
And fixed his eyes upon you?	Did he stare at you?
Most constantly.	The whole time.
I would I had been there.	I wish I’d been there.
It would have much amazed you.	You would have been very shocked.
Very like. Stayed it long?	I’m sure I would have. Did it stay a long time?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.	About as long as it would take someone to count slowly to a hundred.
Longer, longer.	No, longer than that.
Not when I saw ’t.	Not the time I saw it.
His beard was grizzled, no?	His beard was gray, right?
It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silvered.	It was just like in real life, dark brown with silver whiskers in it.
I will watch tonight. Perchance 'Twill walk again.	I’ll stand guard with you tonight. Maybe it’ll come again.
I warrant it will.	I bet it will.
If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though Hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto concealed this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still. And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So fare you well. Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.	If it looks like my good father, I’ll speak to it, even if Hell itself opens up and tells me to be quiet. I ask you, if you’ve kept this a secret, keep doing so. Whatever happens tonight, don’t talk about it. I’ll return the favor. So good-bye for now. I’ll see you on the guards' platform between eleven and twelve tonight.
Our duty to your honor.	We’ll do our duty to you, sir.
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.	Give me your love instead, as I give you mine. Good-bye.
all but HAMLET
	Everyone except HAMLET exits.
My father’s spirit in arms. All is not well. I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to
                                men’s eyes.	My father’s ghost—armed! Something’s wrong. I suspect some foul play. I wish the night were here already! Until then, I have to remain calm. Bad deeds will be revealed, no matter how people try to hide them.
Exit	HAMLET exits.
ERTES and
                        OPHELIA, his sister	LAERTES and his sister OPHELIA enter.
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell. And, sister, as the winds give benefit And convey is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.	My belongings are on the ship already. Good-bye. And, my dear sister, as long as the winds are blowing and ships are sailing, let me hear from you—write.
Do you doubt
                            that?	Do you doubt I’ll write?
For Hamlet and the trifling of his favor, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, The perfume and suppliance of a minute. No more.	As for Hamlet and his attentions to you, just consider it a big flirtation, the temporary phase of a hot-blooded youth. It won’t last. It’s sweet, but his affection will fade after a minute. Not a second more.
No more but so?	No more than a minute?
Think it no more. For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will, but you must fear. His greatness weighed, his will is not his own, For he himself is subject to his birth. He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself, for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state. And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,	Try to think of it like that, anyway. When a youth grows into a man, he doesn’t just get bigger in his body—his responsibilities grow too. He may love you now, and may have only the best intentions, but you have to be on your guard. Remember that he belongs to the royal family, and his intentions don’t matter that much—he’s a slave to his family obligations. He can’t simply make personal choices for himself the way common people can, since the whole country depends on what he does. His choice has to agree with what the nation wants.
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed, which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmastered importunity. Fear it, Ophelia. Fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes. The canker galls the infants of the spring Too oft before their buttons be disclosed. And in the morn and liquid dew of youth, Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary, then. Best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.	So if he says he loves you, you should be wise enough to see that his words only mean as much as the state of Denmark allows them to mean. Then think about how shameful it would be for you to give in to his seductive talk and surrender your treasure chest to his greedy hands. Watch out, Ophelia. Just keep your love under control, and don’t let yourself become a target of his lust. Simply exposing your beauty to the moon at night is risky enough—you don’t have to expose yourself to him. Even good girls sometimes get a bad reputation. Worms ruin flowers before they blossom. Baby blooms are most susceptible to disease. So be careful. Fear will keep you safe. Young people often lose their self-control even without any help from others.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads And recks not his own rede.	I’ll keep your words of wisdom close to my heart. But, my dear brother, don’t be like a bad priest who fails to practice what he preaches, showing me the steep and narrow way to heaven while you frolic on the primrose path of sin.
O, fear me
                            not.	Don’t worry, I won’t.
ONIUS
	POLONIUS enters.
I stay too long. But here my father comes. A double blessing is a double grace. Occasion smiles upon a second leave.	I’ve been here too long. And here comes father. What good luck, to have him bless my leaving not once but twice.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with thee. And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportioned thought his act. Be thou familiar but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel, But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatched, unfledged comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear ’t that th' opposèd may
                                beware of thee. Give every man thy ear but few thy voice. Take each man’s censure but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not expressed in fancy—rich, not gaudy, For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be, For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.	You’re still here? Shame on you—get on board! The wind is filling your ship’s sail, and they’re waiting for you. Here, I give you my blessing again. And just try to remember a few rules of life. Don’t say what you’re thinking, and don’t be too quick to act on what you think. Be friendly to people but don’t overdo it. Once you’ve tested out your friends and found them trustworthy, hold onto them. But don’t waste your time shaking hands with every new guy you meet. Don’t be quick to pick a fight, but once you’re in one, hold your own. Listen to many people, but talk to few. Hear everyone’s opinion, but reserve your judgment. Spend all you can afford on clothes, but make sure they’re quality, not flashy, since clothes make the man—which is doubly true in France. Don’t borrow money and don’t lend it, since when you lend to a friend, you often lose the friendship as well as the money, and borrowing turns a person into a spendthrift. And, above all, be true to yourself. Then you won’t be false to anybody else. Good-bye, son. I hope my blessing will help you absorb what I’ve said.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.	I humbly say good-bye to you, father.
The time invites you. Go. Your servants tend.	Now go, the time is right. Your servants are waiting.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.	Good-bye, Ophelia. Remember what I’ve told you.
'Tis in
                                my memory locked, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.	It’s locked away in my memory, and you’ve got the key.
Farewell.	Good-bye.
RTES
	LAERTES exits.
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?	What did he tell you, Ophelia?
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.	Something about Hamlet.
Marry, well bethought. 'Tis told me he hath very oft of late Given private time to you, and you yourself Have of your audience been most free and bounteous. If it be so as so ’tis put on me— And that in way of caution—I must tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behooves my daughter and your honor. What is between you? Give me up the truth.	A good thing he did, by God. I’ve heard Hamlet’s been spending a lot of time alone with you recently, and you’ve made yourself quite available to him. If things are the way people tell me they are—and they’re only telling me this to warn me—then I have to say, you’re not conducting yourself with the self-restraint a daughter of mine should show. What’s going on between you two? Tell me the truth.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection to me.	He’s offered me a lot of affection lately.
Affection! Pooh, you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call
                                them?	“Affection!” That’s nothing! You’re talking like some innocent girl who doesn’t understand the ways of the world. Do you believe his “offers,” as you call them?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.	I don’t know what to believe, father.
Marry, I’ll teach you. Think yourself a baby That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly, Or—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, Running it thus—you’ll tender me a
                            fool.	Then I’ll tell you. Believe that you are a foolish little baby for believing these “offers” are something real. Offer yourself more respect, or—not to beat this word to death—you’ll offer me the chance to be a laughing-stock.
My lord, he hath importuned me with love In honorable fashion.	Father, he’s always talked about love in an honorable fashion—
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go
                            to.	Yes, “fashion” is just the word—a passing whim. Go on.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven.	And he’s made the holiest vows to me, to back up what he says.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both Even in their promise as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence. Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.	These vows are just traps for stupid birds. I know when a man is on fire, he’ll swear anything. But when a heart’s on fire, it gives out more light than heat, and the fire will be out even before he’s done making his promises. Don’t mistake that for true love. From now on, spend a little less time with him and talk to him less. Make yourself a precious commodity. Remember that Hamlet is young and has a lot more freedom to fool around than you do. In short, Ophelia, don’t believe his love vows, since they’re like flashy pimps who wear nice clothes to lead a woman into filthy acts. To put it plainly, don’t waste your time with Hamlet. Do as I say. Now come along.
I shall obey, my lord.	I’ll do as you say, father.
Exeunt	They exit.
AMLET,
                        HORATIO, and MARCELLUS
	HAMLET, HORATIO, and MARCELLUS enter.
The air bites shrewdly. It is very cold.	The air is biting cold.
It is a nipping and an eager air.	Yes, it’s definitely nippy.
What hour now?	What time is it?
I think it lacks of twelve.	A little before twelve, I think.
No, it is struck.	No, it’s just after twelve; I heard the clock strike.
Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.	Really? I didn’t hear it. So it’s nearly the time when the ghost likes to appear.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces of ordnance goes
                        off	Trumpets play offstage and two cannons are fired.
What does this mean, my lord?	What does that mean, sir?
The king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail and the swaggering upspring reels, And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.	The king is staying up all night drinking and dancing. As he guzzles down his German wine, the musicians make a ruckus to celebrate his draining another cup.
Is it a custom?	Is that a tradition?
Ay, marry, is ’t. But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honored in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.	Yes, it is. But though I was born here and should consider that tradition part of my own heritage, I think it would be better to ignore it than practice it. Other countries criticize us for our loud partying.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase Soil our addition. And indeed it takes From our achievements, though performed at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature in them— As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin), By the o'ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens The form of plausive manners—that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star, Their virtues else (be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo) Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	They call us drunks and insult our noble titles. And our drunkenness does detract from our achievements, as great as they are, and lessens our reputations. It’s just like what happens to certain people who have some birth defect (which they are not responsible for, since nobody chooses how he’s born), or some weird habit or compulsion that changes them completely. It happens sometimes that one little defect in these people, as wonderful and talented as they may be, will make them look completely bad to other people. A tiny spot of evil casts doubt on their good qualities and ruins their reputations.
GHOST
	The GHOST enters.
Look, my lord, it comes!	Look, sir—here it comes!
Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee
                                “Hamlet,” “King,” “Father,”
                                “royal Dane.” O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,	Oh angels, protect us! Whether you’re a good spirit or a cursed demon, whether you bring heavenly breezes or blasts of hell fire, whether your intentions are good or evil, you look so strange I want to talk to you. I’ll call you “Hamlet Senior,” “King,” “Father,” “royal Dane.” Answer me! Don’t drive me crazy with curiosity, but tell me why your church-buried bones have burst out of their coffin, and why your tomb,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous and we fools of nature, So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?	where we quietly buried you, has opened up its heavy marble jaws to spit you out again. What could it mean that you have put on your armor again, you corpse, and have come back to look at the moon, making the night terrifying and stirring us humans with supernatural fears? Why? What do you want from us? What should we do?
 beckons
                        HAMLET
	The GHOST motions for HAMLET to come with it.
It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment did desire To you alone.	It wants you to go off with it, as if it wants to tell you something alone.
Look, with what courteous action It waves you to a more removèd ground. But do not go with it.	Look how politely it’s pointing you to a place that’s farther away. But don’t go.
No, by no means.	Definitely not.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.	It’s not going to speak, so I’ll follow it.
Do not, my lord.	Don’t do it, sir.
Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life in a pin’s fee, And for my soul—what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.	Why, what’s the danger? I don’t value my life one bit. And as for my soul, how can the ghost endanger that, since it’s as immortal as the ghost is? Look, it’s waving me over again. I’ll follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o'er his base into the sea,	What if it tempts you to jump into the sea, sir? Or to the terrifying cliff that overhangs the water,
And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? Think of it. The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	where it takes on some other horrible form that drives you insane. Think about it. The edge of the sea makes people feel despair even at the best of times. All they have to do is look into its depths and hear it roar far below.
It waves me still. —Go on. I’ll follow thee.	It’s still waving to me. —Go ahead, I’ll follow.
You shall not go, my lord.	You’re not going, sir.
 and
                        HORATIO try to hold HAMLET back	MARCELLUS and HORATIO try to hold HAMLET back.
Hold off your
                                hands.	Let go of me.
Be ruled. You shall not go.	Calm down. You’re not going anywhere.
My fate cries out And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve. Still am I called.—Unhand me, gentlemen. (draws his sword) By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me. I say, away!—Go on. I’ll follow thee.	It’s my fate calling me. Every nerve in my body is now as tough as steel. The ghost is still waving me over. Let me go, gentlemen. (he draws his sword) I swear, if anyone holds me back, I’ll make a ghost of him! I say, get away!—Go ahead, I’ll follow you.
 GHOST and
                        HAMLET
	The GHOST and HAMLET exit.
He waxes desperate with imagination.	His imagination is making him crazy.
Let’s follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey
                            him.	Let’s follow them. It’s not right to obey his orders to let him go alone.
Have after. To what issue will this come?	Go ahead and follow him. But what does all this mean, where will it all end?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.	It means that something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.	If that’s true, we should let God take care of it.
Nay, let’s follow him.	No, let’s follow him.
Exeunt	They exit.
GHOST and
                        HAMLET
	The GHOST and HAMLET enter.
Where wilt thou lead me? Speak, I’ll go no
                            further.	Where are you taking me? Speak. I’m not going any farther.
Mark me.	Listen to me.
I will.	I will.
My hour is almost come When I to sulfurous and tormenting flames Must render up myself.	The hour has almost come when I have to return to the horrible flames of purgatory.
Alas, poor ghost!	Ah, poor ghost!
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.	Don’t pity me. Just listen carefully to what I have to tell you.
Speak. I am bound to
                            hear.	Speak. I’m ready to hear you.
So art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.	You must be ready for revenge, too, when you hear me out.
What?	What?
I am thy father’s spirit, Doomed for a certain term to walk the night And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,	I’m the ghost of your father, doomed for a certain period of time to walk the earth at night, while during the day I’m trapped in the fires of purgatory until I’ve done penance for my past sins. If I weren’t forbidden to tell you the secrets of purgatory According to Catholic doctrine, purgatory is a place where souls go to be punished for their sins before going to heaven. purgatory , I could tell you stories that would slice through your soul, freeze your blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fearful porpentine. But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy dear father love—	make your eyes jump out of their sockets, and your hair stand on end like porcupine quills. But mortals like you aren’t allowed to hear this description of the afterlife. Listen, listen! If you ever loved your poor dear father—
O God!	Oh God!
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.	Take revenge for his horrible murder, that crime against nature.
Murder?	Murder?
Murder most foul, as in the best it is. But this most foul, strange and unnatural.	His most horrible murder. Murder’s always horrible, but this one was especially horrible, weird, and unnatural.
Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.	Hurry and tell me about it, so I can take revenge right away, faster than a person falls in love.
I find thee apt, And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear. 'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forgèd process of my death Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	I’m glad you’re eager. You’d have to be as lazy as a weed on the shores of Lethe Lethe was a river in the underworld of classical Greek mythology, whose waters induced forgetfulness. Lethe not to get riled up here. Now listen, Hamlet. Everyone was told that a poisonous snake bit me when I was sleeping in the orchard. But in fact, that’s a lie that’s fooled everyone in Denmark. You should know, my noble son, the real snake that stung your father is now wearing his crown.
O my prophetic soul! My uncle?	I knew it! My uncle?
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen. O Hamlet, what a falling off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel linked, Will sate itself in a celestial bed And prey on garbage. But soft! Methinks I scent the morning air. Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment, whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body And with a sudden vigor doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine. And a most instant tetter barked about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched, Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,	Yes, that incestuous, adulterous animal. With his clever words and fancy gifts, he seduced my seemingly virtuous queen, persuading her to give in to his lust. They were evil words and gifts to seduce her like that! Oh, Hamlet, how far she fell! She went from me, who loved her with the dignity and devotion that suits a legitimate marriage, to a wretch whose natural gifts were poor compared to mine. But just as you can’t corrupt a truly virtuous person no matter how you try, the opposite is also true: a lustful person like her can satisfy herself in a heavenly union and then move on to garbage. But hang on, I think I smell the morning air. So let me be brief here. Your uncle snuck up to me while I was sleeping in the orchard, as I always used to do in the afternoon, and poured a vial of henbane poison into my ear—that poison that moves like quicksilver through the veins and curdles the blood, which is just what it did to me. I broke out in a scaly rash that covered my smooth body with a revolting crust. And that’s how my brother robbed me of my life, my crown, and my queen all at once. He cut me off in the middle of a sinful life.
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled. No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head. Oh, horrible, oh, horrible, most horrible! If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not. Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damnèd incest. But howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once. The glowworm shows the matin to be near, And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	I had no chance to repent my sins or receive last rites. Oh, it’s horrible, horrible, so horrible! If you are human, don’t stand for it. Don’t let the Danish king’s bed be a nest of incest. But however you go about your revenge, don’t corrupt your mind or do any harm to your mother. Leave her to God and her own guilt. Now, good-bye. The glowworm’s light is beginning to fade, so morning is near. Good-bye, good-bye, good-bye. Remember me.
Exit	The GHOST exits.
O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I couple hell? Oh, fie! Hold, hold, my heart, And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember thee! Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past That youth and observation copied there, And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain! My tables!—Meet it is I set it down That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain. At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark.
                                (writes) So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.	Ah, all you up in heaven! And earth! What else? Shall I include hell as well? Damn it! Keep beating, my heart, and muscles, don’t grow old yet—keep me standing. Remember you! Yes, you poor ghost, as long as I have any power of memory in this distracted head. Remember you! Yes, I’ll wipe my mind clean of all trivial facts and memories and preserve only your commandment there. Yes, by God! Oh, you evil woman! Oh, you villain, villain, you damned, smiling villain! Where’s my notebook?—It’s a good idea for me to write down that one can smile and smile, and be a villain. At least it’s possible in Denmark. (he writes) So, uncle, there you are. Now it’s time to deal with the vow I made to my father.
It is “Adieu, adieu. Remember me.” I have sworn ’t.	He said, “Remember me.” I swore I would.
RATIO and
                        MARCELLUS
	MARCELLUS and HORATIO enter.
My lord, my lord!	Sir, sir!
Lord Hamlet—	Lord Hamlet.—
Heaven secure him!	Please let him be all right!
So be it.	I’m all right.
Illo, ho, ho, my lord!	Oh-ho-ho, sir!
Hillo, ho, ho, boy. Come, bird, come.	Oh-ho-ho, kid! Come here.
How is ’t, my noble lord?	So how did it go, sir?
What news, my lord?	What happened, sir?
Oh, wonderful!	It was incredible!
Good my lord, tell it.	Oh, please, tell us, sir.
No. You’ll reveal it.	No, you’ll talk.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.	I swear I won’t, sir.
Nor I, my lord.	I won’t either, sir.
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think it? But you’ll be secret?	Okay. But you promise you can keep a secret?
Ay, by heaven, my lord.	Yes, I swear.
There’s ne'er a villain dwelling in all
                                Denmark But he’s an arrant knave.	Any villain in Denmark is going to be, well, a villain.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us this.	You don’t need a ghost returning from the grave to tell you that, sir.
Why, right, you are in the right. And so, without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part. You, as your business and desire shall point you— For every man has business and desire, Such as it is—and for my own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.	Yes, you’re absolutely right. So, without further ado, the best thing to do now is probably just to shake hands and go our separate ways. You go and take care of your business (since everybody has some business to take care of, whatever it is worth), and I’ll go and pray.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.	You’re talking in such a crazy way, sir.
I’m sorry they offend you, heartily. Yes faith, heartily.	I’m sorry if I offended you; yes, very sorry.
There’s no offense, my
                            lord.	Oh, don’t worry about it, sir. No offense taken.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offense too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. For your desire to know what is between us, O'ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good
                                friends, As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, Give me one poor request.	Ah, but there is, Horatio, there’s a lot of offense. As for this ghost we just saw, he’s a real one, I can tell you that much. But regarding what happened between us, don’t ask—I can’t tell you. And now, my friends, my courageous and educated friends, do me one small favor.
What is
                                ’t, my lord? We will.	What is it, sir? Of course we will.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.	Don’t ever tell anyone what you’ve seen tonight.
My lord, we will not.	We won’t, sir.
Nay, but swear
                                ’t.	No, you have to swear it.
In faith, my lord, not I.	I swear to God I won’t.
Nor I, my lord, in
                                faith.	Me too, I won’t, I swear to God.
Upon my sword.	Swear by my sword.
We have sworn, my lord, already.	But we already swore, sir.
Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.	Yes, but swear by my sword this time.
(cries under the stage)
                            Swear!	(calls out from under the stage) Swear!
Ha, ha, boy! Sayst thou so? Art thou there, truepenny? Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage. Consent to swear.	Ha ha, is that what you say, kid? Are you down there, my man?—Come on, you hear this guy down in the basement. Agree to swear.
Propose the oath, my lord.	Tell us what to swear, sir.
Never to speak of this that you have seen. Swear by my sword.	You swear never to mention what you’ve seen. Swear by my sword.
(beneath) Swear.	(from under the stage) Swear.
Hic et ubique? Then
                                we’ll shift our ground. Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Swear by my sword Never to speak of this that you have heard.	You’re everywhere, aren’t you? Maybe we should move. Come over here, gentlemen, and put your hands on my sword again. Swear by my sword you’ll never mention what you’ve heard.
(beneath) Swear by his
                            sword.	(from under the stage) Swear by his sword.
Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth
                                so fast? A worthy pioneer! Once more remove, good friends.	You said it right, old mole. You’re pretty busy down there in the dirt, aren’t you? What a tunneler! Let’s move again, my friends.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!	My God, this is unbelievably strange.
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come, Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on), That you, at such times seeing me, never shall— With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We
                                could an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or
                                “There be an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out—to note That you know aught of me. This not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	Then give it a nice welcome, as you would give to any stranger. There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than you’ve even dreamed of. But now listen to me. No matter how strangely I act (since I may find it appropriate to act a little crazy in the near future), you must never, ever let on—with a gesture of your hands or a certain expression on your face—that you know anything about what happened to me here tonight. You must never say anything like, “Ah, yes, just as we suspected,” or “We could tell you a thing or two about him,” or anything like that. Swear you won’t.
(beneath) Swear!	(from under the stage) Swear.
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit!—So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you, And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do, to express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let’s go together.	Okay, then, unhappy ghost, you can rest now. So, gentlemen, I thank you heartily and with all my love, and I’ll repay you however I can some day. Let’s go back to court together, but shhh, please. No talking about this. There is so much out of whack in these times. And damn the fact that I’m supposed to fix it! Come on, let’s go.
Exeunt	They exit.
ONIUS with his man
                            REYNALDO
	POLONIUS enters with his servant REYNALDO.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.	Give him this money and these letters, Reynaldo.
I will, my lord.	I will, sir.
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.	It would be wonderfully wise of you, my dear Reynaldo, to ask around about his behavior a little before you visit him.
My lord, I did
                                intend it.	That’s what I thought too, sir.
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir, Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris, And how, and who, what means, and where they keep What company at what expense; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question That they do know my son, come you more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him, As thus: “I know his father and his friends, And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?	Excellent, very good. Ask around and find out what Danish people are in Paris—who they are, where they live and how much money they have, who their friends are. And if you find out in this general sort of questioning that they happen to know my son, you’ll find out much more than if you asked specific questions about him. Just tell them you vaguely know Laertes, say something like, “I’m a friend of his father and I sort of know him,” or whatever. Do you get what I’m saying, Reynaldo?
Ay, very well, my lord.	Yes, very well, sir.
“And in part him, but,” you may say,
                                “not well. But, if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild. Addicted so and so.—” And there put on him What forgeries you please. Marry, none so rank As may dishonor him. Take heed of that. But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips	You should say, “I sort of know him, but not well. Is it the same Laertes who’s a wild party animal? Isn’t he the one who’s always,” and so on. Then just make up whatever you want—of course, nothing so bad that it would shame him. I mean make up any stories that
As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.	sound like your average young guy, the kind of trouble they get into.
As gaming, my lord?	Like gambling, sir?
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.	That’s right, or drinking, swearing, fist-fighting, visiting prostitutes—that kind of thing.
My lord, that would dishonor him!	But that would ruin his reputation!
'Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge. You must not put another scandal on him That he is open to incontinency. That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
                                quaintly That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimèd blood, Of general assault.	Oh no, not if you say it right. I don’t want you to say he’s a sex fiend, that’s not what I mean. Just mention his faults lightly, so they make him seem like a free spirit who’s gone a little too far.
But, my good lord—	But, sir—
Wherefore should you do this?	Why should you do this, you want to know?
Ay, my lord. I would know that.	Yes, sir. I’d like to know.
Marry, sir, here’s my drift: (And I believe it is a fetch of wit) You, laying these slight sullies on my son As ’twere a thing a little soiled i'
                                th' working— Mark you, your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence: “Good sir” or so, or
                                “Friend,” or
                                “Gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	Well, here’s what I’m thinking. (I’m quite proud of myself for coming up with this.) As you talk with someone and hint about my son’s faults and little sins, you’ll watch his reaction, and if he’s ever seen Laertes do any of these things, it will only be natural for him to agree with you, at which point he’ll call you “sir,” or “my good friend,” depending on who the person is, where he comes from, and so on.
Very good, my lord.	Yes, sir.
And then, sir, does he this, he does— What was I about
                                to say? By the mass, I was about to say something. Where did I leave?	And then he’ll … he’ll … wait, what was I about to say? Good God, I was about to say something. What was I saying?
At “closes in the consequence,” at
                                “‘friend,’ Or so” and
                                “‘gentleman.’”	At, “It will be natural for him to agree with you … he’ll call you ‘sir,’ ‘friend,’” et cetera.
At “closes in the consequence.” Ay, marry. He closes thus: “I know the gentleman. I saw him yesterday”—or
                                “t' other day,” Or then, or then, with such or such—“and, as
                                you say, There was he gaming, there o'ertook in’s
                                rouse, There falling out at tennis,” or, perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of
                                sale”— Videlicet a brothel, or so forth.
                                See you now, Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth. And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. So by my former lecture and advice Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?	“It will be natural for him to agree with you.” Ah, yes, that’s right. If he agrees he’ll say something like this: “Yes, I know the gentleman you’re referring to. I just saw him yesterday,” or “the other day,” or whenever it is, you know, “and there he was gambling,” or “there he was, totally wasted, or fighting with somebody about a tennis match, or going into a house of ill repute”—that means a whorehouse, you know—or whatever. Make sure your little lie brings out the truth. We’re doing this wisely and intelligently, indirectly, finding out things by roundabout means. That’s how you’ll find out what my son is up to in Paris. You get my point, don’t you?
My lord, I have.	Yes, I do, sir.
God be wi' you. Fare you
                            well.	God bless you. Have a safe trip.
Good my lord.	Thank you, sir.
Observe his inclination in yourself.	Don’t forget to see what he’s up to with your own eyes. Don’t trust gossip.
I shall, my lord.	I will, sir.
And let him ply his music.	And I hope he’s studying his music like he’s supposed to.
Well, my lord.	Got it, sir.
Farewell.	Good-bye.
ALDO
	REYNALDO exits.
HELIA
	OPHELIA enters.
How now, Ophelia? What’s the matter?	Ophelia, what’s the matter?
O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!	Oh, father, father, I’ve just had such a scare!
With what, i' th' name of God?	From what, in God’s name?
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet, Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced; No hat upon his head; his stockings fouled, Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosèd out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.	Father, I was up in my room sewing when Hamlet came in with no hat on his head, his shirt unbuttoned, and his stockings dirty, undone, and down around his ankles. He was pale as his undershirt, and his knees were knocking together. He looked so out of sorts, as if he’d just come back from hell. He came up to me.
Mad for thy love?	Is he crazy with love for you?
My lord, I do not know. But truly, I do fear it.	I’m not sure, but I’m afraid he might be.
What said he?	What did he say?
He took me by the wrist and held me hard. Then goes he to the length of all his arm, And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.	He grabbed me by the wrist and held me hard, then backed away an arm’s length and just looked at me, staring at me like an artist about to paint my picture. He stayed like that a long time.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being. That done, he lets me go, And, with his head over his shoulder turned, He seemed to find his way without his eyes, For out o' doors he went without their helps, And to the last bended their light on me.	Finally, after shaking my arm a little, and jerking his head up and down three times, he sighed like it was his last breath. After that he let me go. He left the room with his head turned back on me, finding his way out without looking, since his eyes were on me the whole time.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures. I am sorry. What, have you given him any hard words of late?	Come with me. I’ll go tell the king about this. This is definitely love-craziness. Love is such a violent emotion that it makes people self-destruct, as much as any strong emotion. I’m so sorry. Did you tell him anything that might have hurt his feelings lately?
No, my good lord. But as you did command I did repel his fetters and denied His access to me.	No, father, but I did what you told me to do and sent back his letters and wouldn’t let him visit me.
That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him. I feared he did but trifle And meant to wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy! By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king. This must be known, which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate to utter love. Come.	That’s what made him crazy. I regret not observing him more closely before I told you to do that. I thought he was just toying with you and meant to ruin your reputation. Damn my suspicious thoughts! It’s as common for us old people to assume we know more than we do as for young people to be too wild and crazy. Come on, let’s go see the king. We’ve got to discuss this matter, which could cause more trouble if we keep it secret than if we discuss it openly.
Exeunt	They exit.
 Enter King CLAUDIUS and
                        Queen GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN, and attendants	Trumpets play. CLAUDIUS and GERTRUDE enter with ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and attendants.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s
                                “transformation”—so call it Since nor th' exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from th' understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat you both That, being of so young days brought up with him And since so neighbored to his youth and 'havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus That, opened, lies within our remedy.	Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. I’ve wanted to see you for a long time now, but I sent for you so hastily because I need your help right away. You’ve probably heard about the “change” that’s come over Hamlet—that’s the only word for it, since inside and out he’s different from what he was before. I can’t imagine what’s made him so unlike himself, other than his father’s death. Since you both grew up with him and are so familiar with his personality and behavior, I’m asking you to stay a while at court and spend some time with him. See if you can get Hamlet to have some fun, and find out if there’s anything in particular that’s bothering him, so we can set about trying to fix it.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you. And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	Gentlemen, Hamlet’s talked a lot about you, and I know there are no two men alive he’s fonder of. If you’ll be so good as to spend some time with us and help us out, you’ll be thanked on a royal scale.
Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.	Both you and the king might have ordered us to execute your command, instead of asking us so politely.
But we both obey And here give up ourselves, in the full bent, To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded.	But we’ll obey. Our services are entirely at your command.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.	Thanks, Rosencrantz and worthy Guildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz. And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changèd son. Go, some of you, And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.	Thanks, Guildenstern and worthy Rosencrantz. I beg you to pay a visit right away to my son, who’s changed too much. Servants, take these gentlemen to see Hamlet.
Heavens make our presence and our practices Pleasant and helpful to him!	I hope to God we can make him happy and do him some good!
Ay, amen!	Amen to that!
CRANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN, escorted by attendants	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN exit, escorted by attendants.
ONIUS
	POLONIUS enters.
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully returned.	The ambassadors are back from Norway, sir.
Thou still hast been the father of good news.	Once again you bring good news.
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king.	Do I, sir? I assure your majesty I’m only doing my duty both to my God and my good king.
And I do think—or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do—that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	And I believe—unless this brain of mine is not so politically cunning as it used to be—that I’ve found out why Hamlet’s gone crazy.
Oh, speak of that. That do I long to hear.	Tell me! I want very much to find out.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors. My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	All right, but first let the ambassadors speak. Then you can hear my news, as dessert.
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.	Then be so kind as to show them in.
NIUS
	POLONIUS exits.
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found The head and source of all your son’s distemper.	Gertrude, he says he’s found out the reason for your son’s insanity.
I doubt it is no other but the main: His father’s death and our o'erhasty
                                marriage.	I doubt it’s anything but the obvious reason: his father’s dying and our quick marriage.
ONIUS with ambassadors
                            VOLTEMAND and CORNELIUS
	POLONIUS enters with the ambassadors VOLTEMAND and CORNELIUS.
Well, we shall sift him.—Welcome, my good friends! Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?	Well, we’ll get to the bottom of it. Welcome, my good friends. Tell me, Voltemand, what’s the news from the king of Norway?
Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack, But, better looked into, he truly found It was against your highness. Whereat grieved— That so his sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely borne in hand—sends out arrests On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give th' assay of arms against your majesty.  Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,	Greetings to you too, your Highness. As soon as we raised the matter, the king sent out messengers to stop his nephew’s war preparations, which he originally thought were directed against Poland but learned on closer examination were directed against you. He was very upset that Fortinbras had taken advantage of his being old and sick to deceive him, and he ordered Fortinbras’s arrest. Fortinbras swore never to threaten Denmark again.
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack, With an entreaty, herein further shown, That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down. (gives
                                CLAUDIUS a document	The old king was so overjoyed by this promise that he gave young Fortinbras an annual income of three thousand crowns A crown is a kind of gold coin. crowns and permission to lead his soldiers into Poland, asking you officially in this letter to allow his troops to pass through your kingdom on their way to Poland. He’s assuring you of your safety. (he gives CLAUDIUS a document
It likes us well, And at our more considered time we’ll read, Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your well-took labor. Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together. Most welcome home!	I like this news, and when I have time I’ll read this and think about how to reply. Meanwhile, thank you for your efforts. Go relax now. Tonight we’ll have dinner. Welcome back!
TEMAND and
                            CORNELIUS
	VOLTEMAND and CORNELIUS exit.
This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad. Mad call I it, for, to define true madness, What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad? But let that go.	Well, that turned out well in the end. Sir and madam, to make grand speeches about what majesty is, what service is, or why day is day, night is night, and time is time is just a waste of a lot of day, night, and time. Therefore, since the essence of wisdom is not talking too much, I’ll get right to the point here. Your son is crazy. “Crazy” I’m calling it, since how can you say what craziness is except to say that it’s craziness? But that’s another story.
More matter, with less art.	Please, stick to the point.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true. Tis true, ’tis
                                pity, And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish
                                figure, But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then. And now remains	Madam, I’m doing nothing but sticking to the point. It’s true he’s crazy, and it’s a shame it’s true, and it’s truly a shame he’s crazy—but now I sound foolish, so I’ll get right to the point.
That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause. Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend. I have a daughter—have while she is mine— Who in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise. (reads a letter) “To the
                                celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified
                                Ophelia”—That’s
                                an ill phrase, a vile phrase. “Beautified” is
                                a vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus:
                                (reads the
                                letter)“In
                                her excellent white bosom, these,”
                            etc.—	Now, if we agree Hamlet’s crazy, then the next step is to figure out the cause of this effect of craziness, or I suppose I should say the cause of this defect, since this defective effect is caused by something. This is what we must do, and that’s exactly what needs to be done. Think about it. I have a daughter (I have her until she gets married) who’s given me this letter, considering it her duty. Listen and think about this: (he reads a letter) “To the heavenly idol of my soul, the most beautified Ophelia”—By the way, “beautified” sounds bad, it sounds awful, it sounds crude, it’s a terrible use of the word. But I’ll go on: (he reads the letter) “In her excellent white bosom,” et cetera, et cetera—you don’t need to hear all this stuff—
Came this from Hamlet to her?	Hamlet wrote this letter to Ophelia?
Good madam, stay a while. I will be faithful. (reads the letter) “Doubt
                                    thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun
                                    doth move, Doubt truth to be a
                                    liar, But never doubt I
                                    love. O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
                                art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, oh, most best,
                                believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore,
                                    most dear lady, whilst this machine
                                    is to him, Hamlet.” This in obedience hath my daughter shown me, And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear.	Madam, please be patient. I’ll read it to you. (he reads the letter) “You may wonder if the stars are fire, You may wonder if the sun moves across the sky. You may wonder if the truth is a liar, But never wonder if I love. Oh, Ophelia, I’m bad at poetry. I can’t put my feelings into verse, but please believe I love you best, oh, best of all. Believe it. Yours forever, my dearest one, as long as I live—still chugging along, Hamlet.” Dutifully and obediently my daughter showed me this letter, and more like it. She’s told me all about how Hamlet has been courting her—all the details of where, and what he said, and when.
But how hath she received his love?	And how did she react to all this?
What do you think of me?	Sir, what is your opinion of me?
As of a man faithful and honorable.	I know you are loyal and honorable.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had seen this hot love on the wing— As I perceived it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me—what might you, Or my dear majesty your queen here, think, If I had played the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or looked upon this love with idle sight? What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy star. This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; And he, repelled—a short tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves And all we mourn for.	I would like to prove to you that I am. But what would you have thought of me if I had kept quiet when I found out about this hot little love (which I noticed even before my daughter told me about it)? My dear queen, what would you have thought of me if I had turned a blind eye to what was happening between Hamlet and my daughter? No, I had to do something. And so I said to my daughter: “Lord Hamlet is a prince, he’s out of your league. You have to end this.” And then I gave her orders to stay away from him, and not to accept any messages or little gifts from him. She did what I said. When she rejected Hamlet, he became sad, and stopped eating, stopped sleeping, got weak, got dizzy, and as a result lost his mind. And that’s why he’s crazy now, and all of us feel sorry for him.
(to GERTRUDE
                                ) Do you think ’tis
                            this?	(to GERTRUDE) Do you think that’s why Hamlet’s crazy?
It may be, very
                                like.	It may be, it certainly may be.
Hath there been such a time—I would fain know
                                that— That I have positively said, “'Tis
                                so,” When it proved otherwise?	Has there ever been a time—I’d really like to know—when I’ve definitely said something was true, and it turned out not to be true?
Not that I
                            know.	Not that I know of.
(points to his head and shoulders) Take this from this if this be otherwise. If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the center.	(pointing to his head and shoulders) Chop my head off if I’m wrong. I’ll follow the clues and uncover the truth, even if it’s at the very center of the earth.
How may we try it further?	What can we do to find out if it’s true?
You know sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the lobby.	Well, you know he sometimes walks here in the lobby for four hours at a time.
So he does indeed.	Yes, he does.
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
(to
                                CLAUDIUS) Be you and I behind an
                                arras then, Mark the encounter. If he love her not And be not from his reason fall'n thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state But keep a farm and carters.	When he’s there next time, I’ll send my daughter to see him. (to CLAUDIUS) You and I will hide behind the arras An arras is a hanging wall-tapestry. arras and watch what happens. If it turns out that Hamlet’s not in love after all, and hasn’t gone mad from love, then you can fire me from my court job and I’ll go work on a farm.
We will try
                            it.	We’ll try what you suggest.
AMLET, reading on a book	HAMLET enters, reading a book.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.	Look how sadly he’s coming in, reading his book.
Away, I do beseech you, both away. I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.	Please go away, both of you. I’ll speak to him now. Oh, please let me.
AUDIUS and
                        GERTRUDE
	CLAUDIUS and GERTRUDE exit.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?	How are you, Hamlet?
Well, God-'a'-mercy.	Fine, thank you.
Do you know me, my lord?	Do you know who I am?
Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.	Of course. You sell fish.
Not I, my lord.	No, not me, sir.
Then I would you were so honest a man.	In that case I wish you were as good a man as a fish seller.
Honest, my lord?	Good, sir?
Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.	Yes, sir. Only one man in ten thousand is good in this world.
That’s very true, my lord.	That’s definitely true, my lord.
For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing carrion— Have you a daughter?	Since if the sun breeds maggots on a dead dog, kissing the corpse—by the way, do you have a daughter?
I have, my lord.	I do indeed, my lord.
Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
                                blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive—Friend, look to
                                ’t.	Then by all means never let her walk in public. Procreation is a good thing, but if your daughter gets pregnant … look out, friend.
(aside) How say you by that? Still
                                harping on my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He
                                is far gone, far gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much
                                extremity for love, very near this. I’ll speak to him
                                again.—(to
                                HAMLET) What do you read, my
                            lord?	(to himself) Now, what does he mean by that? Still harping on my daughter. But he didn’t recognize me at first. He mistook me for a fish seller. He’s far gone. But when I was young I went crazy for love too, almost as bad as this. I’ll talk to him again.—(to HAMLET) What are you reading, your highness?
Words, words, words.	A lot of words.
What is the matter, my lord?	And what is the subject?
Between who?	Between whom?
I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.	I mean, what do the words say?
Slanders, sir. For the satirical rogue says here that old men
                                have gray beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes
                                purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and that they
                                have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak
                                hams—all which, sir, though I most powerfully and
                                potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set
                                down; for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab
                                you could go backward.	Oh, just lies, sir. The sly writer says here that old men have gray beards, their faces are wrinkled, their eyes full of gunk, and that they have no wisdom and weak thighs. Of course I believe it all, but I don’t think it’s good manners to write it down, since you yourself, sir, would grow as old as I am, if you could only travel backward like a crab.

(aside) Though this be madness, yet
                                there is method in ’t.—(to
                                HAMLET) Will you walk out of the air,
                                my lord?	(to himself) There’s a method to his madness. (to HAMLET) Will you step outside, my lord?
Into my grave.	Into my grave.
Indeed, that is out of the air.
                                (aside) How pregnant sometimes his replies are. A happiness that often madness
                                hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously
                                be delivered of. I will leave him and suddenly contrive the
                                means of meeting between him and my
                                daughter.—(to
                                HAMLET) My honorable lord, I will
                                most humbly take my leave of you.	Well, that’s certainly out of this world, all right. (to himself) His answers are so full of meaning sometimes! He has a way with words, as crazy people often do, and that sane people don’t have a talent for. I’ll leave him now and arrange a meeting between him and my daughter. (to HAMLET) My lord, I’ll take my leave “take my leave” = say good-bye take my leave of you now.
You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will more
                                willingly part withal—except my life, except my life,
                                except my life.	You can’t take anything from me that I care less about—except my life, except my life, except my life.
Fare you well, my lord.	Good-bye, my lord.
(aside) These tedious old
                            fools!	(to himself) These boring old fools!
RANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN enter.
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.	You’re looking for Lord Hamlet. He’s right over there.
God save you, sir!	Thank you, sir.
NIUS
	POLONIUS exits.
My honored lord!	My lord!
My most dear lord!	My dear sir!
My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do you both?	Ah, my good old friends! How are you, Guildenstern? And Rosencrantz! Boys, how are you both doing?
As the indifferent children of the earth.	Oh, as well as anybody.
Happy, in that we are not overhappy. On Fortune’s cap we are not the very button.	Happy that we’re not too happy, lucky in being not too lucky. We’re not exactly at the top of our luck.
Nor the soles of her shoes?	But you’re not down and out, either, are you?
Neither, my lord.	No, we’re just somewhere in the middle, my lord.
Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favors?	So you’re around Lady Luck’s waist?
Faith, her privates we.	Yes, we’re the privates in her army.
In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true. She is a strumpet. What news?	Ha, ha, so you’ve gotten into her private parts? Of course—Lady Luck is such a slut. Anyway, what’s up?
None, my lord, but that the world’s grown
                            honest.	Not much, my lord. Just that the world’s become honest.
Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me
                                question more in particular. What have you, my good
                                friends, deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you
                                to prison hither?	In that case, the end of the world is approaching. But you’re wrong. Let me ask you a particular question. What crimes have you committed to be sent here to this prison?
Prison, my lord?	Prison, my lord?
Denmark’s a prison.	Denmark’s a prison.
Then is the world one.	Then I guess the whole world is one.
A goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and
                                dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.	Yes, quite a large one, with many cells and dungeons, Denmark being one of the worst.
We think not so, my lord.	We don’t think so, my lord.
Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is nothing
                                either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.	Well, then it isn’t one to you, since nothing is really good or bad in itself—it’s all what a person thinks about it. And to me, Denmark is a prison.
Why then, your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow
                                for your mind.	That must be because you’re so ambitious. It’s too small for your large mind.
O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself
                                a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad
                            dreams.	Small? No, I could live in a walnut shell and feel like the king of the universe. The real problem is that I have bad dreams.
Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance
                                of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.	Dreams are a sign of ambition, since ambition is nothing more than the shadow of a dream.
A dream itself is but a shadow.	But a dream itself is just a shadow.
Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality
                                that it is but a shadow’s shadow.	Exactly. In fact, I consider ambition to be so light and airy that it’s only the shadow of a shadow.
Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and
                                outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to
                                th' court? For by my fay, I cannot reason.	Then I guess beggars are the ones with bodies, while ambitious kings and heroes are just the shadows of beggars. Should we go inside? I seem to be losing my mind a bit.
We’ll wait upon you.	We’re at your service, whatever you say.
No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my
                                servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
                                dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship,
                                what make you at Elsinore?	No, no, I won’t class you with my servants, since—to be frank with you—my servants are terrible. But tell me as my friends, what are you doing here at Elsinore?
To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.	Visiting you, my lord. There’s no other reason.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you,
                                and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny.
                                Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
                                visitation? Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come.
                                Nay, speak.	Well, then, I thank you, though I’m such a beggar that even my thanks are not worth much. Did someone tell you to visit me? Or was it just your whim, on your own initiative? Come on, tell me the truth.
What should we say, my lord?	What should we say, my lord?
Why, any thing, but to th' purpose. You were sent for, and
                                there is a kind of confession in your looks which your
                                modesties have not craft enough to color. I know the good
                                king and queen have sent for you.	Anything you like, as long as it answers my question. You were sent for. You’ve got a guilty look on your faces, which you’re too honest to disguise. I know the king and queen sent for you.
To what end, my lord?	Why would they do that, my lord?
That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the
                                rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by
                                the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what
                                more dear a better proposer could charge you withal: be
                                even and direct with me whether you were sent for or no.	That’s what I want you to tell me. Let me remind you of our old friendship, our youth spent together, the duties of our love for each other, and whatever else will make you answer me straight.
(to
                                GUILDENSTERN) What say you?	(to GUILDENSTERN) What do you think?
(aside) Nay, then, I have an eye of
                                you—If you love me, hold not off.	(to himself) I’ve got my eye on you. (to GUILDENSTERN) If you care about me, you’ll be honest with me.
My lord, we were sent for.	My lord, we were sent for.
I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
                                discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no
                                feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know
                                not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises, and indeed it
                                goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame,
                                the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
                                excellent canopy, the air—look you, this brave
                                o'erhanging
                                firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden
                                fire—why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and
                                pestilent congregation of vapors. What a piece of work is a
                                man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form
                                and moving how express and admirable! In action how like
                                an angel, in apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the
                                world. The paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this
                                quintessence of dust? Man delights not me. No, nor woman
                                neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.	I’ll tell you why—so you won’t have to tell me and give away any secrets you have with the king and queen. Recently, though I don’t know why, I’ve lost all sense of fun, stopped exercising—the whole world feels sterile and empty. This beautiful canopy we call the sky—this majestic roof decorated with golden sunlight—why, it’s nothing more to me than disease-filled air. What a perfect invention a human is, how noble in his capacity to reason, how unlimited in thinking, how admirable in his shape and movement, how angelic in action, how godlike in understanding! There’s nothing more beautiful. We surpass all other animals. And yet to me, what are we but dust? Men don’t interest me. No—women neither, but you’re smiling, so you must think they do.
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.	My lord, I wasn’t thinking anything like that.
Why did you laugh then, when I said “man delights not
                                me”?	So why did you laugh when I said that men don’t interest me?
To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten
                                entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted
                                them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you
                                service.	I was just thinking that if people don’t interest you, you’ll be pretty bored by the actors on their way here. We crossed paths with a drama company just a while ago, and they’re coming to entertain you.
He that plays the king shall be welcome. His majesty shall
                                have tribute of me. The adventurous knight shall use his
                                foil and target, the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous
                                man shall end his part in peace, the clown shall make those
                                laugh whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear,
                                and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for
                                ’t. What
                                players are they?	The one who plays the part of the king will be particularly welcome. I’ll treat him like a real king. The adventurous knight will wave around his sword and shield, the lover will be rewarded for his sighs, the crazy character can rant all he wants, the clown will make everybody laugh, and the lady character can say whatever’s on her mind, or I’ll stop the play. Which troupe is it?
Even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians
                                of the city.	The tragic actors from the city, the ones you used to enjoy so much.
How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
                                reputation and profit, was better both ways.	What are they doing on the road? They made more money and got more attention in the city.
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
                                innovation.	But things have changed there, and it’s easier for them on the road now.
Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
                                city? Are they so followed?	Are they as popular as they used to be when I lived in the city? Do they attract big audiences?
No, indeed are they not.	No, not like before.
How comes it? Do they grow rusty?	Why? Are they getting rusty?
Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace. But there is,
                                sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
                                of question and are most tyrannically clapped for ’t.
                                These are now the fashion, and so berattle the common
                                stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of
                                goose quills and dare scarce come thither.	No, they’re busy and as excellent as ever. The problem is that they have to compete with a group of children who yell out their lines and receive outrageous applause for it. These child actors are now in fashion, and they’ve so overtaken the public theaters that society types hardly come at all, they’re so afraid of being mocked by the playwrights who write for the boys.
What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are
                                they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than
                                they can sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should
                                grow themselves to common players (as it is most like if
                                their means are no better), their writers do them wrong to
                                make them exclaim against their own succession?	What, you mean kid actors? Who takes care of them? Who pays their way? Will they stop working when their voices mature? Aren’t the playwrights hurting them by making them upstage adult actors, which they are going to grow up and become? (Unless, of course, they have trust funds.)
Faith, there has been much to do on both sides, and the
                                nation holds it no sin to tar them to controversy. There was,
                                for a while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and
                                the player went to cuffs in the question.	There’s been a whole debate on the topic. For a while, no play was sold to the theaters without a big fight between the children’s playwright and the actors playing adult roles.
Is ’t possible?	Are you kidding?
Oh, there has been much throwing about of brains.	Oh, there’s been a lot of quarreling.
Do the boys carry it away?	And the boys are winning so far?
Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.	Yes, they are, my lord—little boys are carrying the whole theater on their backs, like Hercules carried the world.
It is not very strange. For my uncle is King of Denmark, and
                                those that would make mouths at him while my father lived
                                give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his
                                picture in little. 'Sblood, there is something in this
                                more
                                than natural, if philosophy could find it out.	Actually, it’s not so unusual when you think about it. My uncle is king of Denmark, and the same people who made fun of him while my father was still alive are now rushing to pay twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for miniature portraits of him. There’s something downright unnatural about it, if a philosopher stopped to think about it.
 for the PLAYERS within	Trumpets play offstage, announcing the arrival of the PLAYERS players = actors PLAYERS .
There are the players.	The actors are here.
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come then.
                                Th' appurtenance of welcome is fashion and
                                ceremony. Let me comply with you in this garb—lest my
                                extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly
                                outwards, should more appear like entertainment than
                                yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.	Gentlemen, welcome to Elsinore. Don’t be shy—shake hands with me. If I’m going to welcome you I have to go through all these polite customs, don’t I? And if we don’t shake hands, when I act all nice to the players it will seem like I’m happier to see them than you. You are very welcome here. But still, my uncle-father and aunt-mother have got the wrong idea.
In what, my dear lord?	In what sense, my lord?
I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly,
I know a hawk from a handsaw.	I’m only crazy sometimes. At other times, I know what’s what.
ONIUS
	POLONIUS enters.
Well be with you, gentlemen.	Gentlemen, I hope you are well.
Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at each ear a
                                hearer.
(indicates POLONIUS
                                )That great baby you see there is not
                                yet
out of his swaddling-clouts	Listen, Guildenstern, and you too, Rosencrantz—listen as close as you can! (he gestures toward POLONIUS )This big baby is still in diapers.
Happily he’s the second time come to them, for they say
                                an
old man is twice a child.	Yes, the second time around, since, as they say, old people become children again.
(aside to ROSENCRANTZ
                                and GUILDENSTERN
                                ) I will prophesy
he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.
                                (to
                                POLONIUS)—
You say right, sir. O' Monday morning, ’twas
                                so indeed.	(whispering to ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN) I bet he’s coming to tell me about the actors; just watch. (to POLONIUS) You’re right, sir, that happened on Monday morning.
My lord, I have news to tell you.	My lord, I have news for you.
My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor
in Rome—	My lord, I have news for you. When Roscius was an actor in ancient Rome —
The actors are come hither, my lord.	The actors have arrived, my lord.
Buzz, buzz.	Yawn, snore.
Upon my honor—	I swear—
Then came each actor on his ass—	—each actor arrived on his ass.
The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
 tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral,
scene individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too
heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the
liberty, these are the only men.	They are the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical, one-act plays, or long poems Shakespeare is making fun of the way his contemporaries classified drama. tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical, one-act plays, or long poems . The tragic playwright Seneca is not too heavy for them to handle nor is the comic writer Plautus too light. For formal plays or freer dramas, these are the best actors around.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!	Oh, Jephthah In the Bible, Jephthah unwittingly sacrifices his daughter by making a vow too hastily. The lines below in italics are lyrics from a popular song about Jephthah. Hamlet sings them. Jephthah , judge of ancient Israel, what a treasure you had!
What a treasure had he, my lord?	What treasure did he have, my lord?
Why, One fair daughter and no
                                more, The which he lovèd
                                    passing well.	Well, (sings) One fine daughter, and no more, Whom he loved more than anything—.
(aside) Still on my
                            daughter.	(to himself) Still talking about my daughter, I see.
Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?	Aren’t I right, Jephthah, old man?
If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter
that I love passing well.	If you’re calling me Jephthah, my lord, I do have a daughter I love more than anything, yes.
Nay, that follows not.	No, that’s not logical. Hamlet means that if Polonius has a daughter, it isn’t because Hamlet called him Jephthah. No, that’s not logical.
What follows, then, my lord?	What is logical, then, my lord?
Why,	Why,
As by lot, God wot,
and then, you know,
 It came to pass, as most like
                                    it was—
The first row of the pious chanson will show you more, for
                                look where my abridgement comes.	As if by chance, God knows, and then, you know, It happened, as you’d expect— If you want to know more, you can refer to the popular song, because now I have to stop.
e PLAYERS
	The PLAYERS enter.
You are welcome, masters, welcome, all!—I am glad to
                                see
thee well.—Welcome, good friends.—O old
                                friend? Why,
thy face is valenced since I saw thee last. Comest thou to
beard me in Denmark?—What, my young lady
and mistress! By 'r Lady, your ladyship is nearer to
                                heaven than
when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God,
your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked
within the ring.—Masters, you are all welcome.
                                We’ll e'en
to ’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see.
                                We’ll have
a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your quality.
Come, a passionate speech.	Welcome, welcome to all of you. (he turns to one of the actors)—Oh, you, I’m glad to see you. (turns back to all of them)—Welcome, my good friends. (turns to another actor)—Oh, it’s you! You’ve grown a beard since I saw you last. Are you going to put a beard on me too? (turns to an actor dressed as a woman) Boys played female dramatic roles in Shakespeare’s day. (turns to an actor dressed as a woman) —Well hello, my young lady friend. You’ve grown as much as the height of a pair of platform shoes at least! I hope your voice hasn’t changed yet. (to the whole company)—All of you are most welcome here. We’ll get right to business. First, a speech. Come on, give us a little speech to whet our appetites. A passionate speech, please.
What speech, my good lord?	Which speech, my lord?
I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted.
Or, if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember,
pleased not the million. 'Twas caviary to the general.
                                But it
 was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in
                                such
 matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play,
                                well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as
                                cunning.	I heard you recite a speech for me once that was never acted out, or if it was, it was performed only once, since the play was not popular—like caviar for a slob who couldn’t appreciate it. But the critics and I found it to be an excellent play, with well-ordered scenes that were clever but not fancy.
And, like a neutral to his will and
                                matter,
Did nothing. But as we often see against some
                                storm A silence in the heavens, the rack stand
                                    still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb
                                below As hush as death, anon the dreadful
                                thunder
Doth rend the region. So, after
                                    Pyrrhus' pause, Arousèd vengeance sets him new
                                    a-work. And never did the Cyclops' hammers
                                    fall On Mars’s armor forged for proof
                                    eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus'
                                    bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you
                                gods In general synod take away her
                                power, Break all the spokes and fellies from her
                                    wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of
                                    heaven,
As low as to the fiends!
	But the wind created by his sword is enough to make The weakened old man fall. Just then the city of Ilium, As if feeling this fatal blow to its ruler, Collapses in flames, and the crash Captures Pyrrhus’s attention. His sword, Which was falling onto Priam’s white-haired head Seemed to hang in the air. Pyrrhus stood there like a man in a painting, Doing nothing. But just as a raging thunderstorm Is often interrupted by a moment’s silence, And then soon after the region is split apart by dreadful thunderclaps, In the same way, after Pyrrhus paused, His newly awakened fury set him to work again. When the Cyclopses were making unbreakable armor For the god of war, their hammers never fell So mercilessly as Pyrrhus’s bloody sword Now falls on Priam. Get out of here, Lady Luck, you whore! All you gods Should come together to rob her of her powers, Break all the spokes on her wheel of fortune, And send it rolling down the hills of heaven Into the depths of hell.
This is too long.	This speech is going on too long.
It shall to the barber’s, with your
                                beard.—Prithee, say on.
He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say
                                on. Come
to Hecuba.	We’ll have the barber trim it later, along with your beard. Please, continue, players. This old man only likes the dancing or the sex scenes; he sleeps through all the rest. Go on, come to the part about Hecuba.

But who, ah woe, who had seen the
                                    moblèd queen—	But who—ah, the sadness—had seen the muffled queen—
“The moblèd queen”?	“The muffled queen”?
That’s good. “Moblèd
                                queen” is good.	That’s good. “The muffled queen” is good.
Run barefoot up and down, threatening the
                                    flames With bisson rheum, a clout upon that
                                head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a
                                robe, About her lank and all
                                o'erteemèd loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught
                                up— Who this had seen, with tongue in venom
                                steeped, 'Gainst fortune’s
                                state would treason have pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her
                                    then
 When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious
                                    sport In mincing with his sword her
                                husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamor that she
                                made, (Unless things mortal move them not at
                                    all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of
                                heaven, And passion in the gods.	Running back and forth, spraying the flames with her tears, a cloth on that head where a crown had recently sat and a blanket instead of a robe wrapped around her body, which has withered from childbearing: anyone seeing her in such a state, no matter how spiteful he was, would have cursed Lady Luck for bringing her down like that. If the gods had seen her while she watched Pyrrhus chopping her husband into bits, the terrible cry she uttered would have made all the eyes in heaven burn with hot tears—unless the gods don’t care at all about human affairs.
Look whe'e he has not turned his color and has
tears in ’s eyes.—Prithee, no more.	Look how flushed the actor is, with tears in his eyes. All right, that’s enough, please.
(to FIRST
                                PLAYER) 'Tis well.
                                I’ll have thee speak out the rest
soon. (to
                                POLONIUS) Good my lord, will you see
                                the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used, for they
are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time. After your
death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill
report while you live.	(to FIRST PLAYER) Very fine. I’ll have you perform the rest of it soon. (to POLONIUS)—My lord, will you make sure the actors are made comfortable? Make sure you’re good to them, since what they say about us later will go down in history. It’d be better to have a bad epitaph on our graves than to have their ill will while we’re alive.
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.	My lord, I will give them all they deserve.
God’s bodykins, man, much better. Use every man after
                                his
desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after
your own honor and dignity. The less they deserve, the
more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.	Good heavens, man, give them more than that! If you pay everyone what they deserve, would anyone ever escape a whipping? Treat them with honor and dignity. The less they deserve, the more your generosity is worth. Lead them inside.
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, And can say nothing—no, not for a king, Upon whose property and most dear life A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me “villain”? Breaks my pate
                                across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? Tweaks me by the nose? Gives me the lie i'
                                th' throat As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it, for it cannot be But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall To make oppression bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!  O vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murdered, Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upon ’t, foh! About, my brain.—Hum, I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play Have, by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul that presently They have proclaimed their malefactions. For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks. I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen	What is Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, that he would weep for her? Just imagine what he would do if he had the cause for feeling that I do. He would drown the stage with his tears and burst the audience’s ears with his terrible words, drive the guilty spectators crazy, terrify the innocent ones, confuse the ignorant ones, and astound absolutely everyone’s eyes and ears. But what do I, a grim and uncourageous rascal, do? Mope around like a dreamer, not even bothering with plans for revenge, and I can say nothing—nothing at all—on behalf of a king whose dear life was stolen. Am I a coward? Is there anyone out there who’ll call me “villain” and slap me hard? Pull off my beard? Pinch my nose? Call me the worst liar? By God, if someone would do that to me, I’d take it, because I’m a lily-livered man—otherwise, I would’ve fattened up the local vultures with the intestines of that low-life king a long time ago. Bloody, inhuman villain! Remorseless, treacherous, sex-obsessed, unnatural villain! Ah, revenge! What an ass I am. I’m so damn brave. My dear father’s been murdered, and I’ve been urged to seek revenge by heaven and hell, and yet all I can do is stand around cursing like a whore in the streets. Damn it! I need to get myself together here! Hmm…. I’ve heard that guilty people watching a play have been so affected by the artistry of the scene that they are driven to confess their crimes out loud.
May be the devil, and the devil hath power T' assume a pleasing shape. Yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds More relative than this. The play’s the thing Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king.	Murder has no tongue, but miraculously it still finds a way to speak. I’ll have these actors perform something like my father’s murder in front of my uncle. I’ll watch my uncle. I’ll probe his conscience and see if he flinches. If he becomes pale, I know what to do. The ghost I saw may be the devil, and the devil has the power to assume a pleasing disguise, and so he may be taking advantage of my weakness and sadness to bring about my damnation. I need better evidence than the ghost to work with. The play’s the thing to uncover the conscience of the king.
Exit	HAMLET exits.
UDIUS,
                        GERTRUDE, POLONIUS,
                        OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	CLAUDIUS, GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN enter.
And can you by no drift of conference Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	And you can’t put your heads together and figure out why he’s acting so dazed and confused, ruining his peace and quiet with such dangerous displays of lunacy?
He does confess he feels himself distracted. But from what cause he will by no means speak.	He admits he feels confused, but refuses to say why.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded. But with a crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.	And he’s not exactly eager to be interrogated. He’s very sly and dances around our questions when we try to get him to talk about how he feels.
Did he receive you well?	Did he treat you well when you saw him?
Most like a gentleman.	Yes, in a very gentlemanly way.
But with much forcing of his disposition.	But it seemed like he had to force himself to be nice to us.
Niggard of question, but of our demands Most free in his reply.	He didn’t ask questions, but answered ours at length.
Did you assay him? To any pastime?	Did you try tempting him with some entertainment?
Madam, it so fell out, that certain players We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of joy	Madam, some actors happened to cross our paths on the way here. We told Hamlet about them, and that seemed to do him good.
To hear of it. They are about the court, And, as I think, they have already order This night to play before him.	They are here at court now, and I believe they’ve been told to give a performance for him tonight.
'Tis
                                most true, And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties To hear and see the matter.	It’s true, and he asked me to beg you both to attend.
With all my heart, and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose on to these delights.	It makes me very happy to hear he’s so interested. Gentlemen, please try to sharpen his interest even more, and let this play do him some good.
We shall, my lord.	We will, my lord.
CRANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN exit.
Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her father and myself (lawful espials) Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If ’t be the affliction of his love or no That thus he suffers for.	Dear Gertrude, please give us a moment alone. We’ve secretly arranged for Hamlet to come here so that he can run into Ophelia. Her father and I, justifiably acting as spies, will hide in the room and observe Hamlet’s behavior, to determine whether it’s love that’s making him suffer.
I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honors.	Yes, I’ll go. As for you, Ophelia, I hope that your beauty is the reason for Hamlet’s insane behavior, just as I hope your virtues will return him to normal some day, for the good of both of you.
Madam, I wish it may.	I hope so too, Madam.
RUDE
	GERTRUDE exits.
Ophelia, walk you here. (to
                                CLAUDIUS) Gracious, so please you, We will bestow ourselves. (to
                                OPHELIA)Read on this book That show of such an exercise may color Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this, 'Tis too much proved, that with devotion’s
                                visage And pious action we do sugar o'er The devil himself.	Ophelia, come here.—(to CLAUDIUS) Your Majesty, we will hide. (to OPHELIA)—Read from this prayer book, so it looks natural that you’re all alone. Come to think of it, this happens all the time—people act devoted to God to mask their bad deeds.
(aside) Oh,
                                ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word. O heavy burden!	(to himself) How right he is! His words whip up my guilty feelings. The whore’s pockmarked cheek made pretty with make-up is just like the ugly actions I’m disguising with fine words. What a terrible guilt I feel!
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.	I hear him coming. Quick, let’s hide, my lord.
 and
                        POLONIUS withdraw	CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS hide.
AMLET
	HAMLET enters.
To be, or not to be? That is the question— Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And, by opposing, end them? To die, to sleep— No more—and by a sleep to say we end The heartache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wished! To die, to sleep. To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there’s the
                                rub, For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause. There’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life.	The question is: is it better to be alive or dead? Is it nobler to put up with all the nasty things that luck throws your way, or to fight against all those troubles by simply putting an end to them once and for all? Dying, sleeping—that’s all dying is—a sleep that ends all the heartache and shocks that life on earth gives us—that’s an achievement to wish for. To die, to sleep—to sleep, maybe to dream. Ah, but there’s the catch: in death’s sleep who knows what kind of dreams might come, after we’ve put the noise and commotion of life behind us. That’s certainly something to worry about. That’s the consideration that makes us stretch out our sufferings so long.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Th' oppressor’s wrong, the proud
                                man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of th' unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscovered country from whose bourn No traveler returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pith and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now, The fair Ophelia!—Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remembered.	After all, who would put up with all life’s humiliations—the abuse from superiors, the insults of arrogant men, the pangs of unrequited love, the inefficiency of the legal system, the rudeness of people in office, and the mistreatment good people have to take from bad—when you could simply take out your knife and call it quits? Who would choose to grunt and sweat through an exhausting life, unless they were afraid of something dreadful after death, the undiscovered country from which no visitor returns, which we wonder about without getting any answers from and which makes us stick to the evils we know rather than rush off to seek the ones we don’t? Fear of death makes us all cowards, and our natural boldness becomes weak with too much thinking. Actions that should be carried out at once get misdirected, and stop being actions at all. But shh, here comes the beautiful Ophelia. Pretty lady, please remember me when you pray.
Good my lord, How does your honor for this many a day?	Hello, my lord, how have you been doing lately?
I humbly thank you. Well, well, well.	Very well, thank you. Well, well, well.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours That I have longèd long to redeliver. I pray you now receive them.	My lord, I have some mementos of yours that I’ve been meaning to give back to you for a long time now. Please take them.
No, not I. I never gave you aught.	No, it wasn’t me. I never gave you anything.
My honored lord, you know right well you did, And with them, words of so sweet breath composed As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,	My lord, you know very well that you did, and wrote letters to go along with them, letters so sweetly written that they made your gifts even more valuable. Their perfume is gone now, so take them back. Nice gifts lose
Take these again, for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.	their value when the givers turn out not to be so nice. There, my lord.
Ha, ha, are you honest?	Ha ha, are you good?
My lord?	Excuse me?
Are you fair?	Are you beautiful?
What means your lordship?	My lord, what are you talking about?
That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit
no discourse to your beauty.	I’m just saying that if you’re good and beautiful, your goodness should have nothing to do with your beauty.
Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with
honesty?	But could beauty be related to anything better than goodness?
Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner transform
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty
can translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a
paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you
once.	Sure, since beauty’s power can more easily change a good girl into a whore than the power of goodness can change a beautiful girl into a virgin. This used to be a great puzzle, but now I’ve solved it. I used to love you.
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.	You certainly made me believe you did, my lord.
You should not have believed me, for virtue cannot so
inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
not.	You shouldn’t have believed me, since we’re all rotten at the core, no matter how hard we try to be virtuous. I didn’t love you.
I was the more deceived.	Then I guess I was misled.
Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could
accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had
not borne me.	Get yourself to a convent “Nunnery” could mean either convent or brothel. convent at once. Why would you want to give birth to more sinners? I’m fairly good myself, but even so I could accuse myself of such horrible crimes that it would’ve been better if my mother had never given birth to me. and
I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.
What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth
and heaven? We are arrant knaves, all. Believe none of us.
Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where’s your father?	I am arrogant, vengeful, ambitious, with more ill will in me than I can fit into my thoughts, and more than I have time to carry it out in. Why should people like me be crawling around between earth and heaven? Every one of us is a criminal. Don’t believe any of us. Hurry to a convent. Where’s your father?
At home, my lord.	He’s at home, my lord.
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
no where but in ’s own house. Farewell.	Lock him in, so he can play the fool in his own home only. Good-bye.
O, help him, you sweet heavens!	Oh, dear God, please help him!
If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy
                                dowry.
Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not
 escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go. Farewell. Or, if
thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well
enough what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go,
and quickly too. Farewell.	If you marry, I’ll give you this curse as your wedding present—be as clean as ice, as pure as the driven snow, and you’ll still get a bad reputation. Get yourself to a convent, at once. Good-bye. Or if you have to get married, marry a fool, since wise men know far too well that you’ll cheat on them. Good-bye.
Heavenly powers, restore him!	Dear God, please make him normal again!
I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God has
given you one face and you make yourselves another. You
jig and amble, and you lisp, you nickname God’s
                                creatures
and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no
more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say, we will have no
                                more
marriages. Those that are married already, all but one, shall
live. The rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.	I’ve heard all about you women and your cosmetics too. God gives you one face, but you paint another on top of it. You dance and prance and lisp; you call God’s creations by pet names, and you excuse your sexpot ploys by pleading ignorance. Come on, I won’t stand for it anymore. It’s driven me crazy. I hereby declare we will have no more marriage. Whoever is already married (except one person I know) will stay married—all but one person. Everyone else will have to stay single. Get yourself to a convent, fast.
MLET
	HAMLET exits.
Oh, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!— The courtier’s, soldier’s,
                                scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword, Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That sucked the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatched form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy. Oh, woe is me, T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	Oh, how noble his mind used to be, and how lost he is now! He used to have a gentleman’s grace, a scholar’s wit, and a soldier’s strength. He used to be the jewel of our country, the obvious heir to the throne, the one everyone admired and imitated. And now he has fallen so low! And of all the miserable women who once enjoyed hearing his sweet, seductive words, I am the most miserable. A mind that used to sing so sweetly is now completely out of tune, making harsh sounds instead of fine notes. The unparalleled appearance and nobility he had in the full bloom of his youth has been ruined by madness. O, how miserable I am to see Hamlet now and know what he was before!
 and
                        POLONIUS come forward	CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS come forward.
Love? His affections do not that way tend. Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul O'er which his melancholy sits on brood, And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger—which for to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England For the demand of our neglected tribute. Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?	Love? His feelings don’t move in that direction. And his words, although they were a little disorganized, weren’t crazy. No, his sadness is hatching something, like a hen does sitting on an egg. What hatches very well may be dangerous. So to prevent any harm being done, I’ve made a quick executive decision: he’ll be sent to England to try to get back the money they owe us. With any luck, the sea and new countries will push out these thoughts that have somehow taken root in his mind. What do you think of this plan?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love.—How now, Ophelia? You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.	It should work. But I still believe that his madness was caused by unrequited love.—Hello, Ophelia. You don’t have to tell us what Lord Hamlet said.
AMLET and
                        PLAYERS
	HAMLET and the PLAYERS enter.
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of
your players do, I had as lief the town crier spoke my lines.
Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but
use all gently, for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may
say) whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a
temperance that may give it smoothness. Oh, it offends me
to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a
passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the
groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing
but inexplicable dumb-shows and noise. I would have such
a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.	Perform the speech just as I taught you, musically and smoothly. If you exaggerate the words the way some actors do, I might as well have some newscaster read the lines. Don’t use too many hand gestures; just do a few, gently, like this. When you get into a whirlwind of passion on stage, remember to keep the emotion moderate and smooth. I hate it when I hear a blustery actor in a wig tear a passion to shreds, bursting everyone’s eardrums so as to impress the audience on the lower levels of the playhouse, who for the most part can only appreciate loud noises and pantomime shows. I would whip a guy for making a tyrant sound too tyrannical. That’s as bad as those old plays in which King Herod ranted. Please avoid doing that.
I warrant your honor.	I will, sir.
Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your
tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action,
with this special observance that you o'erstep not the
modesty of nature. For anything so overdone is from the
purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now,
was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature,
                                to
show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the
very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now
this overdone or come tardy off, though it make the
unskillful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the
censure of the which one must in your allowance
                                o'erweigh
a whole theatre of others.	But don’t be too tame, either—let your good sense guide you. Fit the action to the word and the word to the action. Act natural at all costs. Exaggeration has no place in the theater, where the purpose is to represent reality, holding a mirror up to virtue, to vice, and to the spirit of the times. If you handle this badly, it just makes ignorant people laugh while regular theater-goers are miserable—and they’re the ones you should be keeping happy.
Oh, there be players that I have seen play and heard others
praise (and that highly), not to speak it profanely, that,
neither having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed
that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had
                                made
men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so
abominably.	I’ve seen actors who are highly praised, but who—not to be too rude here—can’t even talk or walk like human beings. They bellow and strut about like weird animals that were made to look like men, but very badly.
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.	I hope we’ve corrected that fault pretty well in our company, sir.
O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
speak no more than is set down for them, for there be of
them that will themselves laugh to set on some quantity of
barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime
some necessary question of the play be then to be
considered. That’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful
ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.	Oh, correct it completely. Make sure that the clowns do not ad-lib, since some of them will make certain dumb audience members laugh mindlessly at them, while an important issue in the play needs to be addressed. It’s bad behavior for an actor, anyway, and displays a pitiful ambition to hog the limelight on stage.
LAYERS
	The PLAYERS exit.
ONIUS,
                        ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN
	POLONIUS, GUILDENSTERN, and ROSENCRANTZ enter.
How now, my lord! Will the king hear this piece of work?	So, my lord, will the king be attending the performance?
And the queen too, and that presently.	Yes, he will, and the queen as well.
Bid the players make haste.	Tell the actors to hurry.
NIUS
	POLONIUS exits.
Will you two help to hasten them?	Will you two help them get ready?
Ay, my
                            lord.	Yes, my lord.
CRANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN exit.
What ho, Horatio!	Well, hello there, Horatio!
RATIO
	HORATIO enters.
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note. For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	Watch him closely. I’ll stare at him too, and afterward we’ll compare notes on him.
Well, my lord. If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.	My lord, I’ll watch him as closely as I would a thief. I won’t miss a trick.
rch. Sound a flourish. Enter King
                            CLAUDIUS, Queen
GERTRUDE, POLONIUS,
                        OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ,
                            GUILDENSTERN and other lords attendant with
                            CLAUDIUS’s; guard carrying torches	Trumpets play. CLAUDIUS enters with GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and other lords attendant with CLAUDIUS ’s guard carrying torches.
They are coming to the play. I must be idle. Get you a place.	They’re coming. I can’t talk now. Take your seat.
How fares our cousin Hamlet?	So how’s my nephew Hamlet doing?
Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon’s
                                dish. I eat
the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed capons so.	Wonderful! I eat the air, like chameleons do. I’m positively stuffed with air, I eat so much of it.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words
are not mine.	I have no idea what you’re talking about, Hamlet. You’re not answering my question.
No, nor mine now. (to
                                POLONIUS) My lord, you played once
i' th' university, you say?	Mine, neither. (to POLONIUS) My lord, you performed in amateur dramatic productions in college, right?
That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.	Indeed I did, my lord. I was considered to be quite a good actor.
What did you enact?	What role did you play?
I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i'
                                th' Capitol. Brutus
killed me.	I played Julius Caesar. I was killed in the Capitol. Brutus killed me.
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf
                                there.—Be
the players ready?	That was brutish of them, to kill so capital a guy. —Are the actors ready?
Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.	Yes, my lord. They’re ready whenever you are.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.	Come here, my dear Hamlet. Sit by me.
No, good mother. Here’s metal more attractive.
                                (sits next to OPHELIA
                                )
	No thanks, my good mother. There’s a nicer piece of work right here. (he sits down near OPHELIA )
(to
                                CLAUDIUS) Oh, ho, do you mark
                            that?	(to CLAUDIUS) Hey, did you notice that?
Lady, shall I lie in your lap?	My lady, should I lie in your lap?
No, my lord.	No, my lord.
I mean, my head upon your lap?	I mean, with my head in your lap?
Ay, my lord.	Yes, my lord.
Do you think I meant country matters?	Did you think I was talking about sex?
I think nothing, my lord.	I think nothing In Shakespeare’s time, “nothing” (or “0”) was slang for the vagina. nothing , my lord.
That’s a fair thought to lie between maids'
                                legs.	That’s a nice thought to lie between a girl’s legs.
What is, my lord?	What is, my lord?
Nothing.	Nothing.
You are merry, my lord.	You’re in a good mood tonight, my lord.
Who, I?	Who, me?
Ay, my lord.	Yes, my lord.
O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do
but be merry? For, look you, how cheerfully my
mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.	Oh God—who is, by the way, the best comic of them all. What can you do but be happy? Look how cheerful my mother is, only two hours after my father died.
Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.	No, my lord, it’s been four months.
So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I’ll
                                have a
suit of sables. O heavens! Die two months ago and not
 forgotten yet? Then there’s hope a great
                                man’s memory may
outlive his life half a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must
                                build
churches then, or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with
the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, oh, for, oh,
                                the
hobby-horse is forgot.”	As long as that? Well, in that case these mourning clothes can go to hell. I’ll get myself a fur-trimmed suit. Good heavens, he died two months ago and hasn’t been forgotten yet? In that case, there’s reason to hope a man’s memory may outlive him by six months. But he’s got to build churches for that to happen, my lady, or else he’ll have to put up with being forgotten, like the hobby-horse in the popular song that goes, “Heigh-ho, heigh-ho, the hobby-horse is forgotten.”

Trumpets sound. The dumb show begins
 Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly, the
                                    Queen embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
                                    protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his head
                                    upon her neck, lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
                                    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
                                    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the King’s ears,
                                    and exits. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
                                    passionate action. The Poisoner, with some two or three Mutes,
                                    comes in again, seeming to lament with her. The dead body is
                                    carried away. The Poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems
                                    loath and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his
                                love	Trumpets play. The pantomime show begins. A king and queen enter and embrace lovingly. She kneels before him and resists his passion. He lifts her up and lays his head on her neck. He lies down on a bank of flowers. When she sees him sleeping, she leaves. Another man comes in, takes the crown from the king, pours poison in the sleeping man’s ear, and leaves. The queen returns and finds the king dead. She becomes hysterical. The killer comes back with three others and calms the queen. The body is carried away. The killer woos the queen with gifts. She is cold toward him for a while but then relents and accepts his advances.
LAYERS
	The PLAYERS exit.
What means this, my lord?	What does this mean, my lord?
Marry, this is miching malhecho. It
                                means mischief.	This means we’re having some mischievous fun.
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.	This pantomime was probably a summary of the play.
LOGUE
	The PROLOGUE—the actor who will introduce the play—enters.
We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep
counsel. They’ll tell all.	This guy will tell us everything. Actors can’t keep a secret. They’ll tell all.
Will he tell us what this show meant?	Will he tell us what that pantomime meant?
Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be not you
ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you what it
                                means.	Sure, or anything else you show him. As long as you aren’t ashamed to show it, he won’t be ashamed to tell you what it means.
You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the
                            play.	You’re naughty. I’m watching the play.
For us and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency, We beg your hearing
                            patiently.	We beg you most courteously To be patient with us And watch our humble tragedy.
OGUE
	The PROLOGUE exits.
Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?	Was that the prologue or the inscription on some wedding ring?
'Tis brief, my lord.	It was a bit short, my lord.
As woman’s love.	Yes, as short as a woman’s love.
 KING and PLAYER
                            QUEEN
	Actors playing the roles of KING and QUEEN enter.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus'
                                    cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and
                                    Tellus' orbèd ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrowed
                                sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties
                                    been, Since love our hearts and Hymen did our
                                hands Unite commutual in most sacred
                                bands.	It’s been thirty years since we were married.
So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count o'er ere
                                    love be done.
But woe is me! You are so sick of
                                late, So far from cheer and from your former
                                    state, That I distrust you. Yet though I
                                distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing
                                must. For women fear too much, even as they
                                love,
And women’s fear and love hold
                                    quantity, In neither aught, or in extremity. Now what my love is, proof hath made you
                                    know, And as my love is sized, my fear is
                                so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts
                                    are fear.
Where little fears grow great, great love
                                    grows there.	I hope we stay in love for thirty more years! But I’m sad. You’ve been so gloomy lately, so unlike your usual cheerful self, that I worry something is wrong. But don’t let this upset you, since women are too afraid in love—for them, love and fear go hand in hand. You know very well how much I love you, and my fear is just as deep. When someone’s love is great, the little worries become very big. So when you see someone who worries a lot about little things, you know they’re really in love.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly
                                    too. My operant powers their functions leave to
                                    do. And thou shalt live in this fair world
                                    behind, Honored, beloved, and haply one as
                                kind
For husband shalt thou—
	My love, I will have to leave you soon. My body is growing weak, and I will leave you behind in this beautiful world, honored and much loved. Perhaps you’ll find another husband—
Oh, confound the rest! Such love must needs be treason in my
                                    breast. In second husband let me be
                                accursed! None wed the second but who killed the
                                    first.	Oh, damn everyone else! Remarrying would be treason to my heart. Curse me if I take a second husband. When a woman takes a second husband, it’s because she’s killed off the first.
(aside)Wormwood, wormwood.	(to himself) Harsh!

The instances that second marriage
                                move
 Are base respects of thrift, but none of
                                    love. A second time I kill my husband dead When second husband kisses me in
                                bed.	Someone might marry a second time for money, but never for love. Any time I kissed my second husband in bed, I’d kill the first one all over again.
I do believe you think what now you
                                speak,
But what we do determine oft we
                                break. Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent birth, but poor
                                validity, Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the
                                    tree, But fall, unshaken, when they mellow
                                be.
Most necessary ’tis that we
                                forget
 To pay ourselves what to ourselves is
                                debt. What to ourselves in passion we
                                propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose
                                lose. The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves
                                destroy. Where joy most revels, grief doth most
                                    lament. Grief joys, joy grieves on slender
                                accident. This world is not for aye, nor
                                    ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our
                                    fortunes change.
For ’tis a question left us yet
                                    to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune
                                    love. The great man down, you mark his favorite
                                    flies. The poor advanced makes friends of
                                enemies. And hitherto doth love on fortune
                                tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a
                                friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth
                                try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But, orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary
                                run
That our devices still are
                                overthrown. Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of
                                    our own. So think thou wilt no second husband
                                wed, But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is
                                    dead.	I know that’s what you think now, but people change their minds. Often our intentions are strong at first, but as time goes on they weaken, just like an apple sticks to the tree when it is unripe but falls to the ground once it ripens. The promises we make to ourselves in emotional moments lose their power once the emotion passes. Great grief and joy may rouse us to action, but when the grief or joy have passed, we’re no longer motivated to act. Joy turns to grief in the blink of an eye, and grief becomes joy just as quickly. This world is not made for either one to last long in, and it’s no surprise that even our loves change along with our luck. It’s still a mystery to be solved whether luck controls love, or love controls luck. When a great man has a run of bad luck, watch how followers desert him, and when a poor man advances to an important position, he makes friends with the people he used to hate. Love is unreliable. A person with lots of money will always have friends, while one fallen on hard times makes an enemy of any friend he turns to for money. But back to my original point—what we want and what we get are always at odds. We can have our little dreams, but the fates decide our futures. You think now you’ll never remarry, but that thought will die with me, your first husband.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven
                                light.
Sport and repose lock from me day and
                                night. To desperation turn my trust and
                                hope. An anchor’s cheer in prison be
                                    my scope. Each opposite that blanks the face of
                                joy Meet what I would have well and it
                                destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting
                                strife
 If, once a widow, ever I be
                            wife!	May the earth refuse me food and the heavens go dark, may I have no rest day and night, may my trust and hope turn to despair—may the gloom of a prison overtake me, and may my every joy be turned to sorrow. May I know no peace either in this life or the next one, if I become a wife again after I am a widow.
If she should break it now!	Nice vow, but what if she breaks it?
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave
                                    me here awhile. My spirits grow dull, and fain I would
                                    beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	You have made this vow with deep sincerity. My dear, leave me alone now awhile. My mind is getting foggy, and I would like to sleep and escape this endless day.
ING sleeps	The PLAYER KING sleeps.
Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance between us
                                twain.	Sleep tight, and may nothing come between us.
UEEN
	The PLAYER QUEEN exits.
Madam, how like you this play?	Madam, how are you liking this play?
The lady protests too much, methinks.	The lady’s overdoing it, I think.
Oh, but she’ll keep her word.	Oh, but she’ll keep her word.
Have you heard the argument? Is there no offense in
                            ’t?	Do you know the plot? Is there anything offensive in it?
No, no, they do but jest. Poison in jest. No offense i'
                                th' world.	No, no, it’s just a joke, a little jibe but all in good fun. Not offensive at all.
What do you call the play?	What’s the play called?
The Mousetrap. Marry, how?
                                Tropically. This play is the
image of a murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke’s
name, his wife Baptista. You shall see anon. 'Tis a
                                knavish
piece of work, but what o' that? Your majesty and we
                                that
have free souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince,
our withers are unwrung.	The Mousetrap. Why on earth is it called that, you ask? It’s a metaphor. This play is about a murder committed in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke’s name, and his wife is Baptista. You’ll see soon enough. It’s a piece of garbage, but who cares? You and I have free souls, so it doesn’t concern us. Let the guilty wince. We can watch without being bothered.
IANUS
	LUCIANUS enters.
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.	This is Lucianus, the king’s nephew in the play.
You are as good as a chorus, my lord.	You’re an expert commentator, aren’t you?
I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see
the puppets dallying.	Yes. I could even supply the dialogue between you and your lover if you did your little puppet show of love for me.
You are keen, my lord, you are keen.	Ooh, you’re sharp.
It would cost you a groaning to take off mine edge.	Yes, pointy, but you could take the edge off me— though it might make you moan a little.
Still better and worse.	You get better in your jokes and worse in your manners.
So you must take your husbands.—Begin, murderer. Pox,
leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come, “The
                                croaking
raven doth bellow for revenge—”	That’s what you women get when you trick us into marriage.—Let’s get started, murderer on stage, please! Damn it, stop fussing with the makeup, and get going. We’re all waiting for the revenge!
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and
                                    time agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature
                                seeing, Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds
                                    collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice
                                    blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property On wholesome life usurp
                                immediately.
(pours poison into PLAYER KING
                                ’s ears)
	Evil thoughts, ready hands, the right poison, and the time is right too. The dark night is on my side, for no one can see me. You deadly mixture of weeds and plants, which Hecate, goddess of witchcraft, has put a spell on, use your magic to steal this healthy person’s life away. (pours the poison into the PLAYER KING ’s ears)
He poisons him i' th' garden for
                                ’s estate. His name’s
Gonzago. The story is extant, and writ in choice Italian. You
shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of
                                Gonzago’s
wife.	You see, he poisons the king in his own garden to get the kingdom for himself. The king’s name is Gonzago. The original story was written in the finest Italian. You’ll see shortly how the murderer wins the love of Gonzago’s wife.
 stands up	CLAUDIUS stands up.
The king rises.	The king is getting up.
What, frighted with false fire?	What—is he scared of a gun that only fired a blank?
How fares my lord?	My lord, how are you feeling?
Give o'er the play.	Stop the play.
Give me some light, away!	Turn on the lights. Get me out of here!
Lights, lights, lights!	Lights, lights, get us some lights!
tion. Exeunt all but
                            HAMLET and HORATIO
	Everyone except HAMLET and HORATIO exits.
Why, let the
                                    stricken deer go weep, The hart
                                    ungallèd play. For some must watch
                                    while some must sleep. So runs the world
                                    away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the
                                rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial
                                roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of
                            players?	Let the deer that’s been shot go off and weep, While the unharmed deer happily plays. For some must watch while other must sleep, That’s how the world goes. Couldn’t I get work as an actor (if I hit a run of bad luck) in some acting company, and wear flowers on my shoes?
Half a share.	They might even give you half a share of the company.
A whole one, I. For thou dost know,
                                    O Damon dear, This realm
                                    dismantled was Of Jove himself.
                                    And now reigns here A very,
                                    very—pajock.	No, a whole share for me. For you know, my dearest Damon, That Jove, king of the gods, was Thrown out of power here, and Who’s in charge? A big—peacock.
You might have rhymed.	You could have at least rhymed The obvious rhyme is “ass.” rhymed .
O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word
                                for a thousand
pound. Didst perceive?	Oh, Horatio, I’ll bet you a thousand bucks the ghost was right. Did you notice?
Very well, my lord.	Yes, I did, my lord.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?	When the actors were talking about poison?
I did very well note him.	I watched him very closely.
Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders! For if the king
                                    like not the comedy, Why then, belike,
                                    he likes it not, perdy. Come, some music!	Ah ha! Hey, let’s have some music here! Play your flutes! For if the king doesn’t like the play, Then he doesn’t like it, we may say. Come on, music!
RANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN enter.
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.	My lord, could I have a word with you?
Sir, a whole history.	You can have a whole story, not just a word.
The king, sir—	Sir, the king—
Ay, sir, what of him?	Yes, what about him?
Is in his retirement marvelous distempered.	He’s in his chambers now, and he’s extremely upset.
With drink, sir?	What, an upset stomach from too much booze?
No, my lord, with choler.	No, sir, he’s angry.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this
to the doctor. For, for me to put him to his purgation would
perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	You should be smart enough to tell this to a doctor, not me, since if I treated him, he’d just get angrier.
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start
not so wildly from my affair.	My lord, please try to stick to the subject at hand.
I am tame, sir. Pronounce.	I’ll be good, sir. Go ahead.
The queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit,
hath sent me to you.	The queen your mother is upset, and sent me to see you.
You are welcome.	It’s lovely to see you.
Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If
it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
your mother’s commandment. If not, your pardon and my
return shall be the end of my business.	No, my lord, your polite words are not to the point. If you could please stop fooling around, I’ll tell you what your mother wants. If not, I’ll leave you alone and that’ll be the end of my business.
Sir, I cannot.	Sir, I can’t.
What, my lord?	Can’t what, my lord?
Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s diseased. But,
                                sir,
such answer as I can make, you shall command. Or, rather,
as you say, my mother. Therefore no more but to the matter.
My mother, you say—	Stop fooling around. My mind is confused. But I’ll do my best to give you a straight answer, as you wish—or rather, as my mother wishes. Okay, to the point. My mother, you say …?
Then thus she says: your behavior hath struck her into
amazement and admiration.	She says that your behavior has astonished her.
O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother! But is
                                there
no sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration?
                                Impart.	Oh, what a wonderful son, I can impress my mother! But what’s the upshot of her admiration? Do tell.
She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to
                            bed.	She wants to have a word with you in her bedroom before you go to bed.
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
further trade with us?	I’d obey even if she were my mother ten times over. Is there anything else I can do for you?
My lord, you once did love me.	My lord, you used to like me.
And do still, by these pickers and stealers.	And still do, I swear by my hands.
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do
surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your
griefs to your friend.	My lord, what’s wrong with you? You’re not doing yourself any good by refusing to tell your friends what’s bothering you.
Sir, I lack advancement.	Sir, I have no future ahead of me.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the king
himself for your succession in Denmark?	But how can you say that, when the king himself says you’re the heir to the Danish throne?
the PLAYERS with recorders	The PLAYERS enter with recorders A recorder is a wind instrument that sounds like a flute recorders .
Ay, sir, but “While the grass
                                grows—” The proverb
is something musty—Oh, the recorders! Let me see one.

                                (takes a recorder)
(aside to ROSENCRANTZ
                                and GUILDENSTERN
                                )
To withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the
wind of me as if you would drive me into a toil?	Yes, eventually, but as the proverb goes, “While the grass grows …” The rest of the proverb goes, “…the horse starves.” “While the grass grows …” But that’s a tired old proverb. Oh, the recorders! Let me see one.(he takes a recorder and turns to GUILDENSTERN ) Why are you hovering so close, as if you want to ambush me?
O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too  unmannerly.	Oh, my lord, I’m sorry if I’m forgetting my manners. It’s just that I’m worried about you.
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this
                            pipe?	I don’t really understand what you mean. Will you play this recorder?
My lord, I cannot.	I can’t, my lord.
I pray you.	Please.
Believe me, I cannot.	I’m serious, I can’t.
I do beseech you.	I’m begging you.
I know no touch of it, my lord.	I have no idea how.
It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it
will discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the
stops.	Oh, it’s as easy as lying. Just put your fingers and thumb over the holes and blow into it, and it’ll produce the most moving music. Here, the holes are here.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony. I have not the skill.	But I can’t play a melody. I don’t know how.
Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me!
You would play upon me. You would seem to know my
stops. You would pluck out the heart of my mystery. You
would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my
compass. And there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak? 'Sblood, do
                                you
think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what
instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you
cannot play upon me.	Well, look how you play me—as if you knew exactly where to put your fingers, to blow the mystery out of me, playing all the octaves of my range—and yet you can’t even produce music from this little instrument? My God, do you think I’m easier to manipulate than a pipe? You can push my buttons, but you can’t play me for a fool.
ONIUS
	POLONIUS enters.
God bless you, sir.	Hello and God bless you, sir.
My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.	My lord, the queen wants to speak with you right away.
Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a
                                camel?	Do you see that cloud up there that looks like a camel?
By th' mass, and ’tis like a camel
                            indeed.	By God, it does look like a camel.
Methinks it is like a weasel.	To me it looks like a weasel.
It is backed like a weasel.	It does have a back like a weasel’s.
Or like a whale.	Or like a whale.
Very like a whale.	Yes, very much like a whale.
Then I will come to my mother by and by.
                                (aside) They fool
me to the top of my bent.—I will come by and by.	I’ll go see my mother soon. (to himself) They’re trying as hard as they can to mess with me.—I will go soon.
I will say so.	I’ll tell her.
“By and by” is easily said.	It’s easy enough to say “soon.”
NIUS
	POLONIUS exits.
Leave me, friends.	Now please leave me alone, my friends.
all but HAMLET
	Everyone except HAMLET exits.
'Tis now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood And do such bitter business as the bitter day Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.— O heart, lose not thy nature, let not ever The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom. Let me be cruel, not unnatural.	This is the time of night when witches come out, when graveyards yawn open and the stench of hell seeps out. I could drink hot blood and do such terrible deeds that people would tremble even in the daylight. But I’ve got to go see my mother.—Oh, heart, don’t grow weak, like Nero Nero was a Roman emperor known for his extreme cruelty. Nero Let me be cruel, but not inhuman.
I will speak daggers to her but use none. My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites. How in my words somever she be shent, To give them seals never, my soul, consent!	I’ll speak as sharp as a dagger to her, but I won’t use one on her. And so, my words and thoughts will be at odds.
Exit	HAMLET exits.
UDIUS,
                        ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN
	CLAUDIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN enter.
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you. I your commission will forthwith dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow Out of his lunacies.	I don’t like the way he’s acting, and it’s not safe for me to let his insanity get out of control. So get prepared. I’m sending you to England on diplomatic business, and Hamlet will go with you. As king, I cannot risk the danger he represents as he grows crazier by the hour.
We will ourselves provide. Most holy and religious fear it is To keep those many, many bodies safe That live and feed upon your majesty.	We’ll take care of it. It’s a sacred duty to protect the lives of all those who depend on Your Highness.
The single and peculiar life is bound With all the strength and armor of the mind To keep itself from noyance, but much more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many. The cease of majesty Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw What’s near it with it. It is a massy wheel Fixed on the summit of the highest mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence, Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.	Everyone tries to avoid harm, but the public figure demands even more protection. When a great leader dies he doesn’t die alone but, like a whirlpool, draws others with him. He’s like a huge wheel on the top of the highest mountain whose spokes touch the rim of ten thousand smaller things—when it falls down the mountain, every little object goes down with it. Whenever a king sighs, everyone groans.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage. For we will fetters put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed.	Prepare yourself, please, for this trip. We’ll put a leash on this danger that’s now running wild.
We will haste us.	We’ll hurry.
CRANTZ and
                            GUILDENSTERN
	ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN exit.
ONIUS
	POLONIUS enters.
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet. Behind the arras I’ll convey myself To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax
                                him home. And, as you said (and wisely was it said) 'Tis meet that some more audience than a
                                mother— Since nature makes them partial—should
                                o'erhear The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege. I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed And tell you what I know.	My lord, Hamlet’s going to his mother’s room. I’ll hide behind the tapestry to hear what they say. I bet she’ll chew him out. And as you said (and you said it wisely), it’s good to have someone other than a mother listening in on them, since she can be too partial to him. Goodbye, my lord. I’ll stop by before you go to bed, and tell you what I’ve heard.
Thanks, dear my
                                lord.	Thanks, my dear lord.
NIUS
	POLONIUS exits.
Oh, my offence is rank. It smells to heaven. It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t, A brother’s murder. Pray can I not. Though inclination be as sharp as will, My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, And, like a man to double business bound, I stand in pause where I shall first begin, And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood? Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy But to confront the visage of offence? And what’s in prayer but this twofold force, To be forestallèd ere we come to fall Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up. My fault is past. But oh, what form of prayer Can serve my turn, “Forgive me my foul
                                murder”?	Oh, my crime is so rotten it stinks all the way to heaven. It has the mark of Cain In the Bible, Cain was the first murderer, killing his brother in Genesis 4:10-12. Cain on it, a brother’s murder. I can’t pray, though I want to desperately. My guilt is stronger even than my intentions. And like a person with two opposite things to do at once, I stand paralyzed and neglect them both. So what if this cursed hand of mine is coated with my brother’s blood? Isn’t there enough rain in heaven to wash it clean as snow? Isn’t that what God’s mercy is for? And doesn’t prayer serve these two purposes—to keep us from sinning and to bring us forgiveness when we have sinned? So I’ll pray. I’ve already committed my sin. But, oh, what kind of prayer is there for me? “Dear Lord, forgive me for my horrible murder”?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed Of those effects for which I did the murder: My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. May one be pardoned and retain th' offense? In the corrupted currents of this world Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice, And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above. There is no shuffling. There the action lies In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled, Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults, To give in evidence. What then? What rests? Try what repentance can. What can it not? Yet what can it when one can not repent? O wretched state! O bosom black as death! O limèd soul that, struggling to be free, Art more engaged! Help, angels. Make assay. Bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe. All may be well. (kneels)	That won’t work, since I’m still reaping the rewards of that murder: my crown and my queen. Can a person be forgiven and still keep the fruits of his crime? In this wicked world, criminals often take the money they stole and use it to buy off the law, shoving justice aside. But not in heaven. Up there, every action is judged for exactly what it’s worth, and we’re forced to confront our crimes. So what can I do? What is there left to do? Offer whatever repentance I can—that couldn’t hurt. But it can’t help either! Oh, what a lousy situation I’m in. My heart’s as black as death. My soul is stuck to sin, and the more it struggles to break free, the more it sticks. Help me, angels! C’mon, make an effort. Bend, stubborn knees. Steely heart, be soft as a newborn babe, so I can pray. Perhaps everything will turn out okay after all. (he kneels)
AMLET
	HAMLET enters.
Now might I do it pat. Now he is a-praying. And now I’ll do ’t. And so he goes to
                                heaven. And so am I revenged.—That would be scanned. A villain kills my father, and, for that, I, his sole son, do this same villain send To heaven. Oh, this is hire and salary, not revenge. He took my father grossly, full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May. And how his audit stands who knows save heaven? But in our circumstance and course of thought 'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged	I could do it easily now. He’s praying now. And now I’ll do it. (he draws out his sword) And there he goes, off to heaven. And that’s my revenge. I’d better think about this more carefully. A villain kills my father, and I, my father’s only son, send this same villain to heaven. Seems like I just did him a favor. He killed my father when my father was enjoying life, with all his sins in full bloom, before my father could repent for any of them. Only God knows how many sins my father has to pay for. As for me, I don’t think his prospects look so good.
To take him in the purging of his soul When he is fit and seasoned for his passage? No. Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent. When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage, Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed, At game a-swearing, or about some act That has no relish of salvation in ’t— Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven, And that his soul may be as damned and black As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.	So is it really revenge for me if I kill Claudius right when he is confessing his sins, in perfect condition for a trip to heaven? No. Away, sword, and wait for a better moment to kill him. (he puts his sword away) When he’s sleeping off some drunken orgy, or having incestuous sex, or swearing while he gambles, or committing some other act that has no goodness about it—that’s when I’ll trip him up and send him to hell with his heels kicking up at heaven. My mother’s waiting. The king’s trying to cure himself with prayer, but all he’s doing is keeping himself alive a little longer.
MLET
	HAMLET exits.
(rises) My words fly up, my
                                thoughts remain below. Words without thoughts never to heaven go.	(rising) My words fly up toward heaven, but my thoughts stay down here on earth. Words without thoughts behind them will never make it to heaven.
Exit	CLAUDIUS exits.
TRUDE and
                        POLONIUS
	GERTRUDEand POLONIUS enter.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him. Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your grace hath screened and stood between Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here. Pray you, be round with him.	He’ll come right away. Make sure you lay into him. Tell him his pranks have caused too much trouble, and that Your Highness has taken a lot of heat for them. I’ll be right here, silent. Please be blunt with him.
(within) Mother, mother,
                            mother!	(offstage) Mother, mother, mother!
I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him
                                coming.	Don’t worry, I’ll do what you say. Now hide, I hear him coming.
 hides behind the arras	POLONIUS hides behind the tapestry.
AMLET
	HAMLET enters.
Now mother, what’s the matter?	Now mother, what’s this all about?
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.	Hamlet, you’ve insulted your father.
Mother, you have my father much offended.	Mother, you’ve insulted my father.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.	Come on, you’re answering me foolishly.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.	Go on, you’re questioning me evilly.
Why, how now, Hamlet?	Hamlet, what, why?
What’s
                                the matter now?	What’s the problem now?
Have you forgot me?	Have you forgotten who I am?
No, by the rood, not so. You are the queen, your husband’s brother’s
                                wife, And—would it were not so!—you are my
                            mother.	For God’s sake no, I haven’t. You are the queen, your husband’s brother’s wife, and you are my mother, though I wish you weren’t.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell. I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune. Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.
(to
                                GERTRUDE) Leave wringing of your
                                hands. Peace. Sit you down And let me wring your heart. For so I shall If it be made of penetrable stuff, If damnèd custom have not brassed it so That it is proof and bulwark against sense.	You low-life, nosy, busybody fool, goodbye. I thought you were somebody more important. You’ve gotten what you deserve. I guess you found out it’s dangerous to be a busybody. (to GERTRUDE) Stop wringing your hands. Sit down and let me wring your heart instead, which I will do if it’s still soft enough, if your evil lifestyle has not toughened it against feeling anything at all.
What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue In noise so rude against me?	What have I done that you dare to talk to me so rudely?
Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty, Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an innocent love And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows As false as dicers' oaths—oh, such a deed As from the body of contraction plucks The very soul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words. Heaven’s face doth glow O'er this solidity and compound mass With tristful visage, as against the doom, Is thought-sick at the act.	A deed that destroys modesty, turns virtue into hypocrisy, replaces the blossom on the face of true love with a nasty blemish, makes marriage vows as false as a gambler’s oath—oh, you’ve done a deed that plucks the soul out of marriage and turns religion into meaningless blather. Heaven looks down on this earth, as angry as if Judgment Day were here, and is sick at the thought of what you’ve done.
Ay me, what act That roars so loud and thunders in the index?	C’mon, what’s this deed that sounds so awful even before I know what it is?
Look here upon this picture and on this, The counterfeit presentment of two brothers. See, what a grace was seated on this brow? Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself, An eye like Mars to threaten and command, A station like the herald Mercury New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill— A combination and a form indeed Where every god did seem to set his seal	Look at this picture here, and that one there, the painted images of two brothers Hamlet may be referring to miniatures they wear around their necks, or to pictures on the wall. the painted images of two brothers . Look how kind and gentlemanly this one is, with his curly hair and his forehead like a Greek god. His eye could command like the god of war. His body is as agile as Mercury just landing on a high hill. A figure and a combination of good qualities that seemed like every god had set his stamp on this man.
To give the world assurance of a man. This was your husband. Look you now, what follows. Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes? Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed And batten on this moor? Ha, have you eyes? You cannot call it love, for at your age The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble, And waits upon the judgment. And what judgment Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have, Else could you not have motion. But sure that sense Is apoplexed, for madness would not err, Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled, But it reserved some quantity of choice To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind? Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, Or but a sickly part of one true sense Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush? Rebellious hell, If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame When the compulsive ardor gives the charge, Since frost itself as actively doth burn, And reason panders will.	That was your husband. Now look at this other one. Here is your present husband, like a mildewed ear of corn infecting the healthy one next to it. Do you have eyes? How could you leave the lofty heights of this man here and descend as low as this one? Ha! Do you have eyes? You cannot say you did it out of love, since at your age romantic passions have grown weak, and the heart obeys reason. But what reason could move you from this one to that one? You must have some sense in your head, since you’re able to get around, but it seems to be paralyzed, since even if you were crazy you would know the difference between these two men. No one ever went so insane that they couldn’t get an easy choice like this one right. What devil was it that blindfolded you? Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smell without anything else, the use of even one impaired sense would not permit such a mistake as yours. Oh, for shame, why aren’t you blushing? If evil can overtake even an old mother’s bones, then let it melt my own. It turns out it’s no longer shameful to act on impulse—now that the old are doing so, and now that reason is a servant to desire.
O Hamlet, speak no
                                more! Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul, And there I see such black and grainèd spots As will not leave their tinct.	Oh, Hamlet, stop! You’re making me look into my very soul, where the marks of sin are so thick and black they will never be washed away.
Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed, Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love Over the nasty sty—	Yes, and you lie in the sweaty stench of your dirty sheets, wet with corruption, making love—
O, speak to me no more! These words like daggers enter in my ears. No more, sweet Hamlet.	Oh, you must stop! Your words are like daggers. Please, no more, sweet Hamlet.
A murderer and a
                                villain, A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe Of your precedent lord, a vice of kings, A cutpurse of the empire and the rule, That from a shelf the precious diadem stole, And put it in his pocket—	A murderer and a villain, a low-life who’s not worth a twentieth of a tenth of your first husband—the worst of kings, a thief of the throne, who took the precious crown from a shelf and put it in his pocket—
No more!	Stop!
A king of shreds and patches—	A ragtag king—
GHOST
	The GHOST enters.
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings, You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious
                            figure?	Oh, angels in heaven, protect me with your wings!—What can I do for you, my gracious lord?
Alas, he’s mad!	Oh no! Hamlet’s gone completely crazy.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by The important acting of your dread command? O, say!	Have you come to scold your tardy son for straying from his mission, letting your important command slip by? Tell me!
Do not forget. This visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. But look, amazement on thy mother sits. O, step between her and her fighting soul. Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. Speak to her, Hamlet.	Don’t forget. I’ve come to sharpen your somewhat dull appetite for revenge. But look, your mother is in shock. Oh, keep her struggling soul from being overwhelmed by horrid visions. The imagination works strongest in those with the weakest bodies. Talk to her, Hamlet.
How is it with you, lady?	How are you doing, madam?
Alas, how is
                                ’t with you, That you do bend your eye on vacancy And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse? Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, Your bedded hair, like life in excrements, Starts up and stands on end. O gentle son, Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?	And how are you doing, staring into the empty air and talking to nobody? Your eyes give away your wild thoughts, and your hair is standing upright, like soldiers during a call to arms. Oh my dear son, calm yourself and cool off your overheated mind! What are you staring at?
On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares! His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones, Would make them capable. (to
                                GHOST) Do not look upon me, Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects. Then what I have to do Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.	At him, at him! Look how pale he is and how he glares at me. Preaching even at stones, he could get them to act. (to the GHOST) Don’t look at me like that, unless you want me to cry instead of kill.
To whom do you speak this?	Who are you talking to?
Do you see nothing
                                there?	You don’t see anything?
Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.	Nothing at all, but I can see everything that’s here.
Nor did you nothing hear?	And you don’t hear anything?
No, nothing but
                                ourselves.	No, nothing but us talking.
Why, look you there! Look how it steals away— My father, in his habit as he lived— Look where he goes, even now, out at the portal!	Look, look how it’s sneaking away! My father, dressed just like he was when he was alive! Look, he’s going out the door right now!
HOST
	The GHOST exits.
This the very coinage of your brain. This bodiless creation ecstasy Is very cunning in.	This is only a figment of your imagination. Madness is good at creating hallucinations.
Ecstasy? My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time And makes as healthful music. It is not madness That I have uttered. Bring me to the test, And I the matter will reword, which madness Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering unction to your soul That not your trespass but my madness speaks. It will but skin and film the ulcerous place Whilst rank corruption, mining all within, Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven. Repent what’s past. Avoid what is to come. And do not spread the compost on the weeds To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue, For in the fatness of these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.	Madness? My heart beats just as evenly as yours does. There’s nothing crazy in what I’ve just uttered. Put me to the test. I’ll rephrase everything I’ve just said, which a lunatic couldn’t do. Mother, for the love of God, don’t flatter yourself into believing that it’s my madness, not your crime, that’s the problem. You’d just be concealing the rot that’s eating you from the inside. Confess your sins to heaven. Repent and avoid damnation. Don’t spread manure over the weeds in your heart; it’ll only make them more filthy. Forgive me my good intentions here since in these fat and spoiled times, virtuous people have to say, “Beg your pardon” to vile ones and beg for the chance to do any good.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.	Oh Hamlet, you’ve broken my heart in two!
Oh, throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half. Good night—but go not to mine uncle’s bed. Assume a virtue if you have it not. That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, Of habits devil, is angel yet in this: That to the use of actions fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next abstinence, the next more easy.	Then throw away the worse half, and live a purer life with the other! Good night to you. But don’t go to my uncle’s bed tonight. At least pretend to be virtuous, even if you’re not. Habit is a terrible thing, in that it’s easy to get used to doing evil without feeling bad about it. But it’s also a good thing, in that being good can also become a habit. Say no to sex tonight, and that will make it easier to say no the next time, and still easier the time after that. Habit can change even one’s natural instincts, and either rein in the devil in us, or kick him out. Once again, good night to you, and when you want to repent, I’ll ask you for your blessing too. I’m sorry about what happened to this gentleman (pointing to POLONIUS), but
For use almost can change the stamp of nature, And either rein the devil or throw him out With wondrous potency. Once more, good night, And when you are desirous to be blessed, I’ll blessing beg of you.
                                (points to
                                POLONIUS) For this same lord, I do repent. But heaven hath pleased it so, To punish me with this and this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister. I will bestow him and will answer well The death I gave him. So, again, good night. I must be cruel only to be kind. Thus bad begins and worse remains behind. One word more, good lady—	God wanted to punish me with this murder, and this man with me, so I’m both Heaven’s executioner and its minister of justice. This is bad, but it’ll get worse soon. Oh, and one other thing, madam.
What shall I do?	What should I do?
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do— Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed, Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out: That I essentially am not in madness But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know, For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise, Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so? No, in despite of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket on the house’s top. Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, To try conclusions, in the basket creep And break your own neck down.	Whatever you do, don’t do this: let the fat king seduce you into his bed again, so he can pinch your cheek, call you his bunny, and with filthy kisses and a massage of your neck with his damned fingers, make you admit that my madness is fake, all calculated. What a great idea that would be, because why would a fair, sober, wise queen hide such things from a toad, a pig, a monster like him? Who would do that? No, no, it’s much, much better to spill the beans right away, let the cat out of the bag, and break your neck in the process.
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath And breath of life, I have no life to breathe What thou hast said to me.	You can rest easy, since words are made of breath, and breathing requires that you be alive. I feel too dead to breathe a word of what you’ve told me.
